SCHINDLER'S LIST
Screenplay
by
Steven Zaillian
Based on the novel
by
Thomas Keneally
USE FOR EDUCATIONAL PURPOSES ONLY
IN BLACK AND WHITE:
EXT. RURAL POLAND - SMALL DEPOT - DAY
A small depot set down against monotonous countryside in the
far hinterlands of rural Poland. A folding table on the woodplank
platform. Pens, ink well, forms.
A three year old girl holding the hand of woman watches a
clerk register her name and those of two or three families of
farmers standing before him. Finishing, he motions to an SS
guard nearby to escort them to a waiting, empty, idling
passenger train.
The people climb aboard as the clerk gathers his paperwork.
He folds up his little table, signals with a wave to the
engineer, and climbs up after them.
The nearly-empty train pulls out of the sleepy station.
EXT. TRAIN STATION, CRACOW, POLAND - DAY
TRAIN WHEELS grinding against track, slowing.
FOLDING TABLE LEGS scissoring open. The lever of a train door
being pulled.
NAMES ON LISTS on clipboards held by an ARMY OF CLERKS moving
alongside the tracks.
CLERKS (O.S.)
... Rossen ... Lieberman ...
Wachsberg ... Groder ...
HUNDREDS OF BEWILDERED RURAL FACES coming down off the train.
FORMS being set out on the folding tables. HANDS
straightening pens and pencils and ink pads and stamps.
CLERKS (O.S.)
... when your name is called, go
over there... take this over to
that table...
TYPEWRITER KEYS rapping a name onto a list. A FACE. Keys
typing another NAME. Another FACE.
CLERKS (V.O.)
... you're in the wrong line, wait
over there... you, come over
here...
A MAN is taken from one long line and led to the back of
another. A HAND hammers a rubber stamp at a form. Tight on a
FACE. Keys type another NAME. Another FACE. Another NAME.
2.
CLERKS (V.O.)
... Gemeinerowa ... Gottlieb ...
Biberman ... Steinberg ...
As a hand comes down stamping a gray stripe across a
registration card, there is absolute silence... then MUSIC,
the Hungarian love song, "Gloomy Sunday," distant, like an
echo... and the stripe bleeds into color, into BRIGHT YELLOW
INK.
INT. HOTEL ROOM - CRACOW - NIGHT
The song plays from a radio on a rust-stained sink.
The light in the room is dismal, the furniture cheap. The
curtains are faded and the wallpaper's peeling, but the
clothes laid out across the single bed are beautiful.
The hands of a man lay a tie against a shirt on the bed, then
try it against another. Arm sliding through the sleeve of the
first shirt, buttoning it. Pulling cufflinks through holes.
Knotting a tie. Folding a handkerchief and tucking it into
the pocket of double-breasted linen jacket - all with great
deliberation.
A bureau. Some currency, cigarettes, shot glass, bottle,
passport... and an elaborate gold-on-black enamel Hakenkreuz,
or swastika, which gets pinned to the lapel of the elegant
dinner jacket.
Oskar Schindler steps back to consider his reflection in the
mirror. He likes what he sees. He almost looks reputable in
his one nice suit. Even in this awful room.
The love song from the radio segues to another, simpler
version, without vocals, and -
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CRACOW - NIGHT
A spotlight slicing across a crowded smoke-choked club finds
on a small stage, performing the same song, a man embracing
an accordion and another bowing a violin.
Below, drinking, socializing and conducting business, is a
strange clientele: SS and Army officers, gangsters and girls
and entrepreneurs, thrown together by the circumstance of
war.
Oscar Schindler steps into the club and, with a 50-Zloty note
pinched between his fingers, gestures, "one." He's shown to a
table, a decent one, where another 50-Zloty note slipped from
his billfold lures three waiters to him like fish to bait.
3.
As the waiter who made it there first steps away with the
order, Schindler calmly surveys the room, the faces,
stripping away all that's unimportant to him, settling only
on details that are:
The rank of this man, the higher rank of that one... a
conspicuously empty table, the best in the place by the
stage, with a little "reserved" card on it... money, a payoff
of some kind as it's slipped into a hand that disappears into
the pocket of an SS uniform.
A WAITER SETS DOWN DRINKS
in front of the SS officer who took the bribe. He's at a
table with his girlfriend and a lower-ranking officer. Some
businessmen hover, eager for an invitation to join.
WAITER
From the gentleman.
The waiter indicates a table across the room where Schindler,
seemingly unaware of the SS men, flirts with a girl with a
big camera.
CZURDA
Do I know him?
His sergeant doesn't. His girlfriend doesn't.
CZURDA
Find out who he is.
Czurda watches his sergeant make his way over to Schindler's
table. There's a handshake and introductions before his man -
and Czurda can't believe it - accepts the chair Schindler's
dragging over.
CZURDA
What is he doing?
Czurda waits, but the his man doesn't come back; he's
forgotten, apparently, he went there for a reason.
Eventually, and it irritates him, Czurda has to get up and go
over there. To his girlfriend -
CZURDA
Stay here.
His girlfriend watches him cross toward Schindler's table.
Before he even arrives, Schindler is up and berating him for
leaving his date way over there across the room, wavinq at
the girl to come join them, motioning to waiters to slide
some tables together.
4.
WAITERS ARRIVE WITH PLATES OF CAVIAR
and another round of drinks for the party in Schindler's
corner that has swelled to eight people.
CZURDA
The SS doesn't own the trains,
somebody's got to pay. Whether it's
a passenger car or a livestock
carriage - which, by the way, you
have to see - you have to set aside
an afternoon, come down to Prokocim
and see this.
SCHINDLER
I've been meaning to.
CZURDA
Let me get this one.
Czurda makes a half-hearted move for his wallet.
SCHINDLER
Are you kidding, put it away.
Schindler's money is already out. He pays the waiter, tipping
him extravagantly, and sweeps the room with his eyes again.
CZURDA
Since we've reserved the trains,
logically we should pay. But this
is a lot of money. This is
thousands of fares.
(pause)
The Jews. They're the ones riding
the trains, they should pay.
He laughs at the audacity of the SS making the Jews pay for
their own fares on cattle cars, and looks to Schindler, but
his attention is on a table across the room where three more
high-ranking SS men, without dates, watch the girls who have
replaced the Rosner brothers on stage. The instant
Schindler's billfold comes back out a waiter appears out of
nowhere.
WAITER
Sir?
THE THREE GIRLS
from the stage show changing out of their costumes. One
answers a knock on the dressing room door and the waiter is
revealed with an armful of flowers.
5.
(MORE)
FROM THE STAGE WINGS
the waiter points out Schindler, across the club, shaking the
hands of the dateless SS men. There -
TOFFEL
You aren't by any chance related to
General Schindler.
SCHINDLER
It's funny you should ask. Actually-
(sees something)
Excuse me.
He's noticed the approaching girls and turns their way,
groaning elaborately.
SCHINDLER
No, no, no, you didn't have to come
out here to -
CLUB GIRLS
Thank you, sir.
SCHINDLER
No, I told him, Tell them they were
wonderful, thank them for the show,
tell them they don't have to feel
they have to come out here - and
now here you are.
He shakes his head in embarrassment, like this is the last
thing he wanted, and -
SCHINDLER
I'm sorry, let me introduce you to
my friends here.
He gestures to the three SS officers at the table.
A TABLECLOTH BILLOWS
as a waiter lays it down on another table that's been added
to Schindler's growing encampment. Seating the girls on
either side of the SS officers, he motions to a waiter to
refill the men's drinks and moves among his many other
guests.
REEDER
I'll tell you what I mean by
cooperative. Two days after the
law's passed that all Jews have to
wear the star, Jewish tailors are 
6.
REEDER(CONT'D)
turning them out by the gross in a
variety of fabrics.
Schindler laughs along with the others politely while
supervising the placement of more arriving food. That
interests him much more than politics.
SCHINDLER
(to someone else)
How're you doing, everything all
right here?
TOFFEL
They'll be cooperative to avoid
worse. It's human nature. "We'll do
this, to avoid that."
REEDER
But then it's something else. Which
they do to avoid the next thing.
Which they do to avoid the next
thing.
Returning to the head of the table, Schindler sweeps the room
again with his eyes, noting the arrival of - and the fuss
that's made over - an SS Oberfuhrer, or colonel.
TOFFEL (O.S.)
They'll manage. They always do.
Beg, borrow, steal, bargain, it's
what they do. They weather the
storm.
REEDER (O.S.)
Yeah, well, this storm's different.
This storm's being managed by the
SS.
As the colonel and his date are led across the club to the
reserved table by the stage, great deference is afforded him
by waiters, the maitre 'd and the businessmen in the club.
A ROAR OF LAUGHTER
erupts from Schindler's party in the corner. His guests have
increased to ten or twelve and they're convulsing with
laughter as he moves among them pouring from two bottles of
cognac.
SCHINDLER
No, wait, that's not it -
SS OFFICERS
No, no, please -
7.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER
No, the other one turns to him and,
nervous as hell, says, Quiet,
Frank, don't make trouble.
Now it's hysteria. They're having trouble staying upright in
their chairs. They're teary-eyed, exhausted from all the
laughing, their faces aching.
SCHINDLER
That reminds me -
SS OFFICERS
(begging him)
No, no, no -
Across the room, at the reserved table, the SS colonel,
Scherner, stares; nobody's having a better time than those
people over there. He gestures to an officer coming past -
Czurda - the one who, a couple of hours ago, sent his own man
to find out who the hell Schindler was.
SCHERNER
Who is that?
CZURDA
(like everyone knows)
That's Oskar Schindler. He's an old
friend of... I don't know...
somebody's.
THE GIRL WITH THE BIG CAMERA
screws in a flashbulb as she approaches some businessmen
sitting sullenly at a table. Before she can even ask if they
want a picture -
BUSINESSMAN
No, thank you.
All the important people, including Scherner, are over at
Schindler's table(s), engaged in animated conversation until
he clinks at a goblet with the tines of his fork, gaining
their attention. Rising -
SCHINDLER
My friend, Oberfuhrer Scherner
here, asked earlier if I've come to
Cracow for business or pleasure.
Scherner's right there, in the chair next to Schindler's.
SCHINDLER 
8.
I told him, and this is the truth,
I've never been able to tell the
two apart.
He gestures very subtly to the girl with the camera to get
ready to take a picture, and picks up his glass.
SCHINDLER
Does everybody have a drink?
They do, the last of many, and raise them for a toast.
SCHINDLER
I'd like you to drink with me to
this city, which - with its
industries, its rail system, its
nightlife, its beauty - holds for
us all, I believe, greater
opportunities, for both business
and pleasure, than we've yet
imagined. To Cracow.
EVERYBODY
To Cracow.
As they all clink their glasses, Schindler nods to the girl
with the camera. The bulb flashes and the noise of the club
suddenly drops out as the moment is caught forever - Oskar
Schindler, surrounded by his many new friends, smiling
urbanely.
EXT. CRACOW - DAY
From a loud speaker mounted on a truck negotiating a narrow
street issues a voice alerting the Untermensch (the
subhumans) of Cracow to the latest of many restrictive
edicts, this one forbidding the kosher preparation of meats.
It's September, 1939. General Sigmund List's armored
divisions, driving north from the Sudetenland, have taken
Cracow, and the signs of the Occupation are everywhere:
A poster on a wall depicting a virginal Polish girl handing
food to a hook-nosed Jew with a shadow like Satan's. Another
with the slogan (Subtitle) "Jews = Lice Typhus."
A shop window displaying a picture of a human skull with
lines indicating the smaller circumference, and therefore
lesser intelligence, of the Judaic brain.
A soldier docking the side-locks of an Orthodox man with his
infantry bayonet.
9.
EXT. ALLEY AND CENTRUM, CRACOW - DAY
A young man emerges from an alley pulling off his Jewish
armband. Crossing the Centrum past German soldiers and
trucks, he pockets it, pulls a small crucifix on a chain out
from under the collar of his silk shirt and approaches a highspired
and ornate cathedral.
The ubiquitous loud speaker on the truck rumbling past
announces another edict, this one reducing Jewish Poles'
rations to half that of non-Jewish Poles'.
INT. ST. MARY'S CATHEDRAL - DAY
A dark and cavernous place. A priest at the altar performing
Mass to scattered parishioners.
The young Polish Jew from the street, Poldek Pfefferberg,
drags a finger through the water in the font and genuflects
before moving down the center aisle past others in the
shadows, Jewish black marketeers like himself, each with a
little notepad, conducting whispered business -
BLACK MARKETEERS
I've got a client who'll sell Marks
for Zloty at two-point-four-five to
one... trade furs for ration
coupons... truckload of wicks...
bolts of cloth... Irish whiskey...
Persian carpets... cigarettes...
Pfefferberg slides into a pew beside two other young man -
Goldberg and Chilowicz - going over figures and notes
scribbled on their little pads. He pulls a cracked container
of shoe polish from his pocket and waits for Chilowicz to
look at it.
CHILOWICZ
(bored)
What.
PFEFFERBERG
You don't recognize it?
CHILOWICZ
It's shoe polish. You asked for
shoe polish.
PFEFFERBERG
In metal containers, you gave me
glass, that's not what I asked for.
10.
Chilowicz all but ignores Pfefferberg, noting instead a
gentleman changing pews (Schindler), moving closer to a
couple of Jewish hustlers who, noticing him too, get up and
leave.
PFEFFERBERG
My client sold it to his client who
sold it to the Army. Only by the
time it got there because of the
cold - it broke - all ten thousand
units.
Chilowicz doesn't care; he resumes scribbling in his little
notebook as though Pfefferberg weren't there. Goldberg smiles
to himself, pleased he's not involved in this particular
deal, and glances to the gentleman changing pews again,
moving past them.
CHILOWICZ
This isn't my problem.
PFEFFERBERG
This isn't your problem? This is
"dangerous material." That's what
they're calling it. And they're
right.
In a quick motion Pfefferberg cuts Chilowicz's hand with a
jagged edge of the glass, drawing a thin line of blood. It
startles Chilowicz more than it hurts him and he stares at
the "weapon," then at his associate holding it, and finally
makes a notation in his little pad.
CHILOWICZ
Metal containers.
There's a creak of wood as someone sits in the pew behind
them, and they all, at once, intone responses to the priest's
prayers. After a moment -
SCHINDLER (O.S.)
That's a nice shirt.
Their backs to him, Goldberg, Chilowicz and Pfefferberg
consider each other's shirts, wondering which of them the
German is addressing.
SCHINDLER (O.S.)
You don't know where I could find a
shirt like that.
All three of them know the wise thing would be to get up now
and leave. 
11.
Even a civilian German could have you arrested for no reason
whatsoever. But Pfefferberg can't resist a deal. He gives the
others a look that says, I have the nerve, you don't, and
glances back gesturing to his shirt.
PFEFFERBERG
Like this?
GOLDBERG
It's illegal to buy or sell
anything on the street, we don't do
that. We're here to pray.
Goldberg "prays," and tries to discourage Pfefferberg from
pursuing this transaction any further with a just a look.
Pfefferberg ignores it.
PFEFFERBERG
You have any idea what a shirt like
this costs?
SCHINDLER
Nice things cost money.
Goldberg and Chilowicz have had enough. They get up, cross
themselves, and move out of the pew. Pfefferberg and
Schindler watch them go before -
PFEFFERFERG
How many?
SCHINDLER
I don't know, ten or twelve. That's
a good color. Dark blues, grays.
Schindler takes out his money and begins peeling off bills,
waiting for Pfefferberg to nod when it's enough. He's being
overcharged, and he knows it, but Pfefferberg keeps pushing
it, More. The look Schindler gives him lets him know that
he's trying to hustle a hustler, but that, in this instance
at least, he'll let it go. He hands over the money and
Pfefferberg hands over a notepad -
PFEFFERBERG
Write down your measurements.
As Schindler writes down the information, Pfefferberg catches
Chilowicz's glance from a doorway on his way out. Coward,
Pfefferberg's look back to him says.
SCHINDLER
(as he writes)
I'm going to need some other
things, too, as things come up.
12.
EXT. CRACOW - DAY
A mason trowels mortar onto a brick, taps it into place,
scrapes off the excess cement. Shifting slightly, a crew of
bricklayers is revealed, erecting a ten-foot wall where a
street once ran unimpeded.
INT. DRESNER APARTMENT - DAY
Late afternoon sunlight, partially obscured by the wall going
up outside the window, filters in on a three year girl, the
one glimpsed at the rural depot, perched on a couch with a
small suitcase on her lap.
POLISH WOMAN (O.S.)
Their name was on a list. What the
list meant, I don't know, but a
truck came, they were put on the
truck and it drove away.
The girl stares vacantly at these unfamiliar surroundings as
the adults across the room at a table talk about her.
POLISH WOMAN
I can't keep her. Never mind the SS
- for five hundred zloty my
neighbors are hunting down Jews
with sickles and scythes.
The others at the table - Mr. and Mrs. Dresner, their
daughter Danka and cousin Idek Schindel - consider the small
silent figure across the room. Behind her, beyond the window,
the masons have cemented another row of bricks, blocking more
of the sun. Fifteen year old Danka gets up from the table,
goes over and sits with the little girl.
DANKA
Genia? I'm Danka.
Genia considers the teenager suspiciously, the stares down at
the floor.
DANKA
We're cousins. We've never met but
I know your mother, Eva. She used
to buy me cakes and candy when I
was about your -
GENIA
My mother's name's not Eva, it's
Jasha. My father's name is Tadeusz.
My grandmother's name is Sophia and
my grandfather is Ludvik.
13.
Danka glances over at the others, frowning at the fictional
geneology the little girl has had to learn in order to
survive.
Idek, comes over, sits on her other side, and, in a moment,
produces from a pocket a small wooden toy.
He waits for her eyes to drift to it. It takes a while, but
they finally do. The toy is a lumberjack and wolf with axes
in their hands, and when Idek manipulates it, the blades come
down on the log between the figures, just missing each other,
over and over... and Genia buries a smile.
IDEK
My name is Idek. I'm your mother's
brother and you're safe with me.
He hands her the toy. Behind them, the wall outside is
finished, robbing the room of light.
INT. JUDENRAT OFFICES, CRACOW - DAY
Moving across the faces of representatives of the Judenrat -
or Jewish Council - empathic but ultimately powerless
administrators dealing as best they can with the huge influx
of rural Jews arriving every day on the SS trains.
The place is crowded beyond belief, like a post office gone
mad, the dispossessed and disoriented people in need of
housing and jobs that just don't exist. The lines stretch
back across the large room, through the door -
EXT. JUDENRAT OFFICES - CONTINUOUS - DAY
- onto the sidewalk, down the street, around the corner and
down that street - around which a Moto-Guzzi motorcycle roars
into view, comes past the last person in line, past those
curving around the corner, and those on this sidewalk,
downshifts and rolls to a stop.
Schindler climbs down, strolls past the people funnelling in
through the doorway -
INT. JUDENRAT OFFICES - CONTINUOUS - DAY
- past those in the lines splaying across the room and to the
front of one of them where, unceremoniously, he interrupts
the man standing there in order to address the administrator -
SCHINDLER
I'm looking for Itzhak Stern.
14.
A bespectacled man at a desk in the corner glances up at the
mention of his name. He has the face and manner of a Talmudic
scholar, and tries not to look too long at the German being
given elbow room by the Jew at the head of the line.
SCHINDLER
Are you him?
Stern seems unable to answer, wondering perhaps if his number
has just come up. His silence begins to annoy Schindler.
SCHINDLER
Are you Itzhak Stern or not?
STERN
(finally managing a nod)
I am.
Schindler approaches the desk, dragging a chair over on the
way. He sits down in it and offers a hand, which Stern stares
at confused for a moment. He tentatively reaches for it and
finds his own grasped firmly. The hands part and Schindler
buries his into a pocket. The hand reappears with flask in it
and he pours a shot of cognac in the cap.
SCHINDLER
There's a company you did the books
for on Lipowa Street, made what,
pots and pans?
Stern stares at the cognac Schindler's offering him. He
doesn't know who this man is, or what he wants. He could be a
member of the Gestapo for all Stern knows.
STERN
By law, I have to tell you, sir,
I'm a Jew.
Schindler looks puzzled; then shrugs, dismissing it.
SCHINDLER
All right, you've done it, good
company, you think?
He keeps holding out the drink. Stern declines it by not
reaching for it.
STERN
It did all right.
Schindler drinks, takes out a streamlined cigarette case and
holds it out in offering. Stern declines again and Schindler
tamps a cigarette and sets it between his lips.
15.
SCHINDLER
I don't know anything about
enamelware, do you?
STERN
I was just the accountant.
SCHINDLER
Simple engineering, though,
wouldn't you think? Change the
machines around, whatever you do,
you could make other things,
couldn't you?
He fires the cigarette with the flame of a lighter and lowers
his voice in case anyone is listening in.
SCHINDLER
Field kits, mess kits...
He spits out a speck of tobacco and waits for a reaction. It
doesn't come; Stern is waiting for the other shoe to drop.
Schindler misinterprets Stern's silence for a lack of
understanding.
SCHINDLER
Army contracts.
His shrug adds, Right? Stern nods mechanically.
SCHINDLER
Once the war ends, forget it, but
for now it's great, you could make
a fortune, don't you think?
He smiles broadly, good-naturedly, perhaps imagining the
fortune he could amass. Stern dampens contempt with a matter
of fact tone -
STERN
I think most people right now have
other priorities.
Schindler tries for a moment to imagine what they could
possibly be. He can't, even though there are people all
around desperate in the face of the latest rash of edicts.
SCHINDLER
Like what?
Stern smiles despite himself. The man's manner is so simple,
so in contrast to his own and the complexities of being a Jew
in occupied Cracow in 1939.
16.
STERN
I'm sure you'll do just fine if you
get the contracts. In fact the
worse things get the better you'll
do.
SCHINDLER
Oh, I can get the contracts, that's
the easy part. Finding the money to
buy the company, that's hard.
He laughs again. But then, just as abruptly, he's dead
serious. Stern stares nonplussed.
STERN
You don't have any money?
SCHINDLER
Not that kind of money. You know
anybody?
Stern takes a long astonished look at him, sitting there
taking another sip of his cognac, placid as a large dog.
SCHINDLER
Jews, yeah. Investors.
(pause)
You must have contacts in the
Jewish business community, working
here.
STERN
What "community?" Jews can no
longer own businesses, sir, that's
why this one's in receivership.
SCHINDLER
Well, they wouldn't own it, I'd own
it. I'd pay them back in product.
STERN
(pause)
Pots and pans.
SCHINDLER
Something they can hold in their
hands. They can trade it on the
black market, do whatever they
want, everybody's happy.
He shrugs; it sounds more than fair to him. In fact, so taken
with the spirit of his own largesse, he offers even more:
17.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER
If you want, you could run the
company for me.
Stern studies him. This man sitting before him is not the
Gestapo. He's nothing more than a carpetbagging salesman with
a salesman's pitch.
STERN
Let me understand. They'd put up
all the money and I'd do all the
work. What, if you don't mind my
asking, would you do?
Schindler takes no offense; he reads it as an honest question
deserving of an honest answer -
SCHINDLER
I'd make sure it's known the
company's in business. I'd see that
it had a certain... panache. That's
what I'm good at, not the work,
the... presentation.
He waits for Stern's response. It's eventually given, imbued
with cool finality -
STERN
I'm sure I don't know anybody who'd
be interested in this.
SCHINDLER
They should be.
(a slow knowing nod)
They should be.
EXT. CRACOW - DAY
In absolute silence, a suitcase thrown from a second story
window arcs through the air. As it hits the pavement,
spilling open - sound on - and:
Thousands of families pushing barrows piled high with chairs,
mattresses, grandfather clocks. On a mass forced exodus from
their homes in Kazimierz, they trundle their belongings
across the Vistula bridge as loud speakers mounted on trucks
blare Edict #44/91 -
LOUD SPEAKERS
In the interest of reducing racial
conflict in the Government General
of Poland, a Jewish quarter has
been created south of the Vistula 
18.
LOUD SPEAKERS(CONT'D)
in Podgorze -
INT. APARTMENT - STRASZEWSKIEGO STREET
An elegant apartment from which its wealthy inhabitants, the
Nussbaums, are being unceremoniously evicted at gunpoint.
They gather as much as they can carry - jewelry, a case of
silver-ware, landscapes in gilded frames - and are herded out
-
EXT. STRASZEWSKIEGO STREET
The Nussbaums emerge from their fashionable building - #7
Straszewskiego Street - and join the throngs carrying furs
and kettles and furniture and children. A German soldier
kicks apart an outlawed radio.
LOUD SPEAKERS
Residency in the closed Jewish
quarter is compulsory. Failure to
register with housing authorities
by March 20th violates edict 44/91
and will result in arrest.
Crowds of Poles line the sidewalks like spectators on a
parade route. Some wave. Some take it more soberly, as if
sensing they may be next.
POLISH GIRL
Goodbye, Jews.
EXT. GHETTO GATE - DAY
The ghetto gate greets its new citizens with a mixed message.
Its scalloped ramparts at once suggest Arabesque elegance and
gravestones, and the sign in Hebrew above its arches, "Jewish
Town," strives to reassure while the broken glass cemented
along its nine-foot rim dissuades thoughts of escape.
The little folding tables have been dragged out and set up
again, and at them sit the clerks, making lists, stamping
cards and assigning housing vouchers. The Dresners can be
glimpsed, and Rosner brothers and their families.
Chilowicz, of all people, has somehow managed to elevate
himself to a station of some authority. Armed with something
more frightening than a gun - a clipboard - he moves through
the crowds aiding the Gestapo.
PFEFFERBERG
What's this?
Pfefferberg, with his wife Mila, in a line that seems to
stretch back forever, flicks at Chilowicz's armband.
19.
CHILOWICZ
Ghetto Police, Poldek. I'm a
policeman now, can you believe it?
I know, it's hard to believe.
PFEFFERBERG
Actually, it isn't.
CHILOWICZ
It's a good racket. It's the only
racket here. Maybe I could put in a
good word for you with my
superiors.
PFEFFERBERG
Your superiors.
CHILOWICZ
They're not as bad as everyone
says. Well, maybe they are, but -
(whispers)
There's a way to make a lot of
money here.
They consider each other for a long moment until Pfefferberg
notices, some distance away, Goldberg waving to him. He's
wearing an OD armband, too. That figures.
PFEFFERBERG
No, thanks.
Pfefferberg leads his wife past Chilowicz and into the
ghetto.
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT BUILDING - DAY
An impossibly crowded staircase leading up past four landings
and hallways. Families, including the Nussbaums, hauling
their belonginqs, entangled with one another, hunt for their
assigned living quarters.
EXT. STRASZEWSKIEGO STREET
A real estate agent meets Schindler at the entrance to #7
Straszewskiego Street, leads him along the ground floor hall
and into an elevator. As the gate closes -
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT
a door opens revealing to the Nussbaums and their maid a oneroom
apartment already occupied by a family of six.
20.
INT. STRASZEWSKIEGO STREET APARTMENT
Schindler moves through the Nussbaums' vacated apartment,
considering it's many fine appointments - polished hardwood
floors, Persian rugs, nice furniture, French doors, modern
kitchen -
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT - CONTINUED
- clothes boiling in big pots on the stove, stirred by a
woman in rags, sheets hanging from lines stretched across the
room over a few sticks of furniture and some children with
coughs, the Nussbaums staring in dismay from the doorway -
INT/EXT. STRASZEWSKIEGO STREET APARTMENT - CONTINUED
Schindler steps out on a balcony that overlooks a quiet park.
His glance up the street finds, not half a block away, Wawel
Castle. This is nice. This is a nice place.
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT - CONTINUED
Nestled among their few possessions in a corner of the dingy
room, the Nussbaums stare at the other family, who are
staring at them. In a whisper -
MRS. NUSSBAUM
Wilhem?
(pause)
It could be worse.
Very slowly, he turns his head to her in disbelief.
MR. NUSSBAUM
How? Tell me. How on earth could it
possibly be worse?
He's answered not by her, but by the scuffle of shoes of
another family, Orthodox Jews, dragging their things in from
the hall and staring at the Nussbaums in dismay.
EXT. GHETTO - NIGHT
Laundry hangs across narrow streets like flags of a
dispossessed nation. From somewhere comes the liturgical solo
of a cantor.
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT - NIGHT
The singing filters in through the thin walls to the next
apartment. In this one, looking like they can't bear much
more of it, sit some non-Orthodox businessmen, Stern and
Schindler.
21.
SCHINDLER
For each thousand you invest, you
take from the loading dock two
hundred kilos of enamelware a month
- to begin in July and to continue
for one year - after which time,
we're even.
(he shrugs)
That's it. It's very simple.
He lets them think about it, pours a shot of cognac from his
flask and offers it to Stern who brought this group together
and now sits at Schindler's side. The accountant declines.
INVESTOR 1
Not good enough.
SCHINDLER
Not good enough? Look where you're
living. Look where you've been put.
"Not good enough."
(he almost laughs at the
squalor)
A couple of months ago, you'd be
right. Not anymore.
INVESTOR 1
Money's still money.
SCHINDLER
No it isn't, that's why we're here.
Trade goods - that's the only
currency that'll be worth anything
in the ghetto.
Schindler lights a cigarette and waits for an answer. Which
doesn't come. Which irritates him.
SCHINDLER
Did I call this meeting? You told
Mr. Stern you wanted to speak to
me. I'm here. I've made you an
offer. A fair offer.
INVESTOR 1
Fair would be a percentage in the
company.
SCHINDLER
Forget the whole thing.
22.
(MORE)
He caps his flask, pockets it and reaches for his top coat.
The investors glance among themselves. Schindler slips into
his coat.
INVESTOR 2
How do we know you'll do what you
say?
SCHINDLER
Because I said I would. What do you
want, a contract? To be filed
where? To be upheld by what court?
I said what I'll do, that's our
contract.
The investors study him. This is not a manageable German.
Whether he's honest or not is impossible to say. Their
glances to Stern don't help them; he doesn't know either.
Eventually, one of the men nods, He's in. Then another. And
another.
INT. FACTORY FLOOR - DAY
A power button is pushed, starting the motor of a metal
press. The machine coughs to life, and -
INT. UPSTAIRS OFFICE - SAME TIME - DAY
Schindler, at a wall of windows, peers down at the lone
technician making adjustments to the machine. Row after row
of presses, lathes and furnaces, all in bad shape, sit on the
floor that's awash in debris.
STERN
The standard SS rate for Jewish
skilled labor is seven Marks a day,
five for unskilled and women. This
is what you pay the Reich Economic
Office, the laborers themselves
receive nothing. Poles you pay
wages. Generally, they get a little
more. Are you listening?
Schindler turns from the wall of glass to face his new
accountant/plant manager.
SCHINDLER
What was that about the SS, the
rate, the - ?
STERN
The Jewish worker's salary - you
pay it directly to the SS, not to 
23.
STERN(CONT'D)
the worker. He gets nothing.
SCHINDLER
But it's less. It's less than what
I would pay a Pole. That's the
point I'm trying to make. Poles
cost more.
Stern hesitates, then nods. The look on Schindler's face
says, Well, what's to debate, the answer's clear to any fool.
SCHINDLER
Why should I hire Poles?
INT. FACTORY FLOOR - DAY
Another machine starting up, growling louder, louder -
EXT. PEACE SQUARE, THE GHETTO - DAY
To an identity card with a photograph, a German clerk
attaches a blue sticker, the holy Blauschein - proof that the
carrier is an essential worker. At other folding tables other
clerks pass summary judgment on hundreds of ghetto dwellers
standing in long lines.
TEACHER
I'm a teacher.
The man tries to hand over documentation supporting the claim
along with his Kennkarte to a German clerk.
CLERK
Not essential work, stand over
there.
Over there, other "non-essential people" are climbing onto
trucks bound for unknown destinations. The teacher
reluctantly relinquishes his place in line.
EXT. PEACE SQUARE - LATER - DAY
The teacher at the head of the line again, but this time with
Stern at his side.
TEACHER
I'm a metal polisher.
He hands over a piece of paper. The clerk takes a look, is
satisfied with it, brushes glue on the back of a Blauschein
and sticks it to the man's work card.
CLERK
Good.
24.
The world's gone mad.
INT. FACTORY FLOOR - DAY
Another machine starting up, a lathe. A technician points
things out to the teacher and a dozen others recruited by
Stern.
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT - NIGHT
A valise full of money. The investors around a table.
Schindler noting the amounts contributed.
EXT/INT. CRACOW GARAGE - DAY
A garage door slides open revealing a gleaming black Adler
limousine. Schindler steps past Pfefferberg and, moving
around the car, carefully touches its smooth lines.
EXT. CRACOW - DAY
While the citizens of Cracow move along streets trying to
make themselves invisible, Schindler drives past them and
military trucks in the back of the conspicuous limousine.
INT. SCHINDLER'S OFFICE - SAME TIME - DAY
A sign painter brushes the words, "Herr Direktor," discreetly
proportioned, on the frosted glass of the door.
Inside the large office, painters on ladders scrape at the
walls while Schindler, behind a desk draped with drop-cloths,
considers a young woman seated before him.
SCHINDLER
Filing, billing, keeping track of
my appointments. Shorthand. Typing
obviously. How is your typing?
HARD CUT TO:
THE KEYS OF A TYPEWRITER slapping at paper. As Schindler
slowly circles around her, the first girl JUMPCUTS to a
second at the typewriter, and to a third, a fourth, a fifth,
a sixth - the painters' ladders moving around the room on
each cut until, on the eighteenth girl, the office is
completely painted and Schindler is back at his desk, awash
with resumes.
STERN
Well?
25.
Schindler glances up to Stern who has stepped inside and
stands by the door. The girls are gone. Schindler shrugs
hopelessly.
SCHINDLER
I can't decide.
EXT. FACTORY - DAY
Men and pulleys hoisting a big "IF" up the side of the
building and setting it into place: "D.E.F."
Down below, Schindler, with all eighteen of the young goodlooking
women - his new secretaries - poses for a
photographer.
The National Socialist flag unfurls behind them in the
breeze.
INT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - NIGHT
Music. Swastikas. On uniforms and on Schindler's lapel. He
moves among his many party guests, making sure each of the SS
men has enough to eat and drink.
INT. FACTORY - DAY
Another machine starting up. Another. Another.
EXT. PEACE SQUARE - DAY
Stern pulls Mrs. Dresner and her daughter Danka from a line
of people climbing aboard a military truck.
EXT. PEACE SQUARE - DAY
A clerk affixes the all-important blue sticker to the womens'
work cards.
INT. FACTORY - DAY
A furnace ignites with a whoosh. The needle on a gauge
climbs. A technician points out to the Dresners and others
recruited off the street the correct firing temperature.
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT - NIGHT
A hand rummaging under a rusty basin comes down with a
fistful of zloty. Following it and the woman grasping it out
of the kitchen, the investors around a table are revealed.
As they hand over their money to Schindler, he notes the
amounts in a careless scrawl on a little pad. 
26.
The woman gives her husband the money from the kitchen and he
in turn gives it to the German entrepreneur.
INT. PFEFFERBERG'S APARTMENT - NIGHT
Schindler pulls the decks of money from his pockets and sets
them on a table. As he scribbles a list of luxury goods on
his note pad, Pfefferberg calculates his commission and hands
it mechanically over his shoulder to his wife who retreats
into the kitchen and hides it.
EXT. VISTULA RIVER - NIGHT
A ferret of a man under the Podgorze Bridge counts and
pockets Pfefferberg's-Schindler's-the-investors' money before
throwing aside a tarpaulin covering boxes of fresh fruit in
the bottom of a row boat.
INT. GHETTO CLINIC - NIGHT
A doctor unlocks a glass cabinet and pushes aside medicines
and instruments, revealing a cavity in the wall. From it, he
takes several bottles of cognac, handing each to Pfefferberg.
EXT. CATHOLIC CEMETERY - NIGHT
Flanked by headstones on every side, a Pole jams a crowbar at
the earth, wedges it under a buried length of timber, and,
with Pfefferberg's help, pries it off, revealing cases of
cigarettes.
INT. UPSTAIRS FOYER - D.E.F. - DAY
The eighteen secretaries assemble gift baskets of liquor,
cigarettes, coffee, tea, fresh fruit and other luxury goods.
Moving among them, checking the cards designating the
recipients, Schindler plucks a jar of caviar and a box of
cigars from one basket and drops them in another.
SCHINDLER
Scherner's an Oberfuhrer. That's
above a Sturmbannfuhrer. Let's try
and keep this straight.
INT. SCHINDLER'S OFFICE - DAY
Glancing down at the hundred or so workers on the factory
floor, Schindler dictates a letter to one of his secretaries:
SCHINDLER
It's my distinct pleasure to offer
you the services of Deutsche
Emailwaren Fabrik -
27.
INT. FACTORY - DAY
The elaborate gift baskets are wheeled past the workers
struggling to master the mechanics of enamelware production,
and failing.
SCHINDLER
- manufacturers of superior
enamelware crockery for military
use -
INT. TOFFEL'S OFFICE, SS HEADQUARTERS - DAY
As Unterscharfuhrer Herman Toffel considers the wondrous
contents of the gift basket on his desk, his secretary reads
from the note that accompanied it -
TOFFELIS SEC'Y
Anticipating the enclosed bids will
meet with your approval -
INT. CZURDA'S OFFICE, SS HEADQUARTERS - DAY
As Obersturmbannfuhrer Czurda examines the label of French
champagne from his (larger) gift basket, his secretary reads -
CZURDA'S SEC'Y
- and looking forward to a long and
mutually prosperous association -
INT. SCHERNER'S OFFICE, SS HEADQUARTERS - DAY
As Oberfuhrer Scherner lifts the lid of a box of Havana
cigars from his (even larger) basket, his secretary reads -
SCHERNER'S SEC'Y
- I extend to you, in advance, my
sincerest gratitude -
INT. TOFFEL'S OFFICE
Nudging aside a plate of pate to get to his pen set, Toffel
initials Schindler's submitted bids.
TOFFEL'S SEC'Y (V.O.)
Best regards, Oskar Schindler -
INT. CZURDA'S OFFICE
Czurda initials the bids.
CZURDA'S SEC'Y (V.O.)
- Oskar Schindler -
28.
INT. SCHERNER'S OFFICE
Scherner signs several Armaments contracts, the letters
"D.E.F." appearing on all of them.
SCHERNER'S SEC'Y (V.O.)
- Oskar Schindler, Direktor, D.E.F.
INT/EXT. FACTORY - DAY
Workers slide raw sheets of metal into presses that stamp
them into plates, bowls and cups -
The products are carted over to other workers who dip them
into vats of enamel and carry them on long sticks to and into
furnaces -
Mess kits already baked and dried are wheeled to the packing
area, boxed and sealed and marked and carted outside to the
loading dock and put into trucks -
As the trucks roll out, the Adler limousine pulls in. The
driver hurries out, opens a rear door, and Schindler emerges -
Few of the 300 Jewish laborers glance up from their work at
Herr Direktor - the big gold party pin stuck into the lapel
of his fur-collared top coat as he moves through the place,
his place, his factory -
He climbs the stairs to the office foyer, comes past his army
of beautiful secretaries and crooks a finger to Stern at a
desk covered with ledgers.
The accountant follows after Schindler to his office, passing
the girl nearest it, the prettiest, Klonowska, hunting and
pecking at a typewriter, and the sign painter, kneeling,
repainting "Herr Direktor" larger on the door -
Schindler crosses his office to the wall of windows, his
favorite place in the world, and looks down at all the
activity below.
SCHINDLER
Sit down.
Stern takes a seat. Schindler pours two drinks from a
decanter and, turning back, holds one out to Stern. Stern, of
course, declines. Schindler groans.
SCHINDLER
Oh, come on.
29.
He puts the drink in Stern's hand, moves behind his desk and
sits.
SCHINDLER
My father was fond of saying you
need three things in life. A good
doctor, a forgiving priest and a
clever accountant. The first two -
He dismisses them with a shrug.
SCHINDLER
I've never had much use for them.
But the third -
He raises his glass in recognition of the accountant. Stern's
stays in his lap.
SCHINDLER
(long sufferingly)
Just pretend for Christ's sake.
Stern acquiesces, raises the glass slightly, but it's an
empty mechanical gesture. Schindler drinks. Stern doesn't; he
sets his glass down.
STERN
Is that all?
SCHINDLER
(annoyed)
I'm trying to thank you. I'm saying
I couldn't have done this without
you. The usual thing would be for
you to acknowledge my gratitude. It
would also, by the way, be the
courteous thing.
STERN
(pause)
You're welcome.
Schindler stares at him, bewildered by the hollowness of his
tone. In fact, everything about Stern puzzles him.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, okay, you can go.
Stern gets up and leaves.
30.
INT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - MORNING
Klonowska, wearing a man's silk robe, traipses past the
remains of a party to the front door. Opening it reveals a
nice looking, nicely dressed woman with a suitcase.
KLONOWSKA
Yes?
A series of realizations is made by each of them, quickly,
silently, ending up with Klonowska looking ill.
SCHINDLER
Who is it?
INT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - MORNING
Schindler sets a cup of coffee down in front of his wife.
Behind him, through a doorway, Klonowska can be seen
hurriedly gathering her things.
SCHINDLER
She's so embarrassed - look at her -
Emilie Schindler begrudges him a glance to the bedroom,
catching the girl just as she looks up - embarrassed.
SCHINDLER
You know what, you'd like her.
EMILIE
Oskar, please -
SCHINDLER
What -
EMILIE
I don't have to like her just
because you do. It doesn't work
that way.
SCHINDLER
You would, though. That's all I'm
saying.
His face is complete innocence. It's the first thing she fell
in love with; and perhaps the thing that keeps her from
killing him now. Klonowska emerges from the bedroom
thoroughly self-conscious.
KLONOWSKA
Goodbye. It was a pleasure meeting
you.
31.
She shakes Emilie's limp hand. Schindler sees her to the
door, lets her out and returns to the table, smiling to
himself. Emilie's glancing around at the place.
EMILIE
You've done well here.
He nods; he's proud of it. He studies her.
SCHINDLER
You look great.
EXT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT BUILDING - NIGHT
They emerge from the building in formal clothes, both of them
looking great. It's wet and slick out; the doorman offers
Emilie his arm.
DOORMAN
Careful of the pavement -
SCHINDLER
- Mrs. Schindler.
The doorman shoots a glance to Schindler that asks, clearly,
Really? Schindler opens the passenger door of the Mercedes
for his wife, and the doorman helps her in.
INT. RESTAURANT - NIGHT
A nice place. "No Jews or Dogs Allowed." The maitre 'd
welcomes the couple warmly, shakes Schindler's hand. Nodding
to his date -
SCHINDLER
Mrs. Schindler.
The maitre 'd tries to bury his surprise. He's almost
successful.
INT. RESTAURANT - LATER - NIGHT
No fewer than four waiters attend them - refilling a glass,
sliding pastries onto china, lighting Schindler's cigarette,
raking crumbs from the table with little combs.
EMILIE
It's not a charade, all this?
SCHINDLER
A charade? How could it be a
charade?
32.
She doesn't know, but she does know him. And all these signs
of apparent success just don't fit his profile. Schindler
lets her in on a discovery -
SCHINDLER
There's no way I could have known
this before, but there was always
something missing. In every
business I tried, I see now it
wasn't me that was failing, it was
this thing, this missing thing.
Even if I'd known what it was,
there's nothing I could have done
about it, because you can't create
this thing. And it makes all the
difference in the world between
success and failure.
He waits for her to guess what the thing is. His look says,
It's so simple, how can you not know?
EMILIE
Luck.
SCHINDLER
War.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - NIGHT
"Gloomy Sunday" from a combo on a stage. Schindler and Emilie
in each others' arms, dancing. Both have had a few.
SCHINDLER
Did you know that young men are
killing themselves because of this
song? Thwarted by love, they quote
its lyrics in their suicide notes.
The Reich Propaganda Office has
banned it. Consequently, you hear
it everywhere you go.
Pressed against her, he can feel her laugh to herself.
SCHINDLER
What, it's true.
EMILIE
No, I'm just happy. I feel like an
old-fashioned couple. It feels
good.
He smiles, even as his eyes roam the room and find and meet
the eyes of a German girl dancing with another man.
33.
INT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - LATER - NIGHT
Schindler and Emilie lounging in bed, champagne bottle on the
nightstand. Long silence before -
EMILIE
Should I stay?
SCHINDLER
(pause)
It's a beautiful city.
That's not the answer she's looking for and he knows it.
EMILIE
Should I stay?
SCHINDLER
(pause)
It's up to you.
That's not it either.
EMILIE
No, it's up to you.
Schindler stares out at the lights of the city. They look
like jewels.
EMILIE
Promise me no doorman or maitre 'd
will presume I am anyone other than
Mrs. Schindler... and I'll stay.
He promises her nothing.
EXT. TRAIN STATION - DAY
Emilie waves goodbye to him from a first-class compartment
window. Down on the platform, he waves goodbye to her. As the
train pulls away, he turns away, and -
- the platform of the next track is revealed, where soldiers
and clerks are supervising the boarding of hundreds of Jews
onto another train.
CLERKS
Your luggage will follow you. Make
sure it's clearly labeled. Leave
your luggage on the platform...
Tight on pencils and pens being borrowed, changing hands, and
names being carefully written on labels.
34.
EXT. D.E.F. LOADING DOCK - DAY
As workers load crates of enamelware onto trucks, Stern and
Schindler and the dock foreman confer over an invoice. More
to Stern -
FOREMAN
Every other time it's been all
right. This time when I weigh the
truck, I see he's heavy, he's
loaded more than he's supposed to.
I point this out to him. I tell him
to wait. He tells me he's got a new
arrangement with Mr. Schindler -
(to Schindler) )
- that you know all about it and
it's okay with you.
SCHINDLER
It's "okay" with me?
On the surface, Schindler remains calm; underneath, he's
livid. Clearly it's not "okay" with him.
STERN
How heavy was he?
FOREMAN
Too much for it to be a mistake. A
hundred kilos.
Stern and Schindler exchange a glance. Then -
SCHINDLER
You're sure.
The foreman nods.
INT. GHETTO STOREFRONT - DAY
Schindler and two thugs bang in through the front door,
startling a woman at a desk. They move past her without a
word and into the back of the place, into a storeroom, and
stride past long racks full of enamelware and other goods.
A man glances up, sees them coming. He's one of Schindler's
investors, the one who questioned the German's word. The
man's teenage sons rush to their father's defense, but one of
the thugs grabs him and locks an arm tightly around his neck
while the other warns the boys to stay back with a truncheon.
Silence. Then, calmly -
35.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER
If you or anyone acting as an agent
for you comes to my factory again,
I'll have you arrested.
INVESTOR
It was a mistake.
SCHINDLER
It was a mistake? What was a
mistake? How do you know what I'm
talking about?
INVESTOR
All right, it wasn't a mistake, but
it was one time.
SCHINDLER
We had a deal, you broke it. One
phone call and your whole family is
dead.
He turns and walks away. The thug loosens his grip and, with
the other, follows. The investor's sons help their father up
off the floor. Gasping, he yells -
INVESTOR
I gave you money.
- but Schindler is already gone, coming through the front
office and out the front door.
INT. FACTORY FLOOR - DAY
The long tables accommodate most of the workers. The rest eat
their lunch on the floor. Soup and bread.
INT. SCHINDLER'S OFFICE - SAME TIME - DAY
An elegant place setting for one. Meat and vegetables and a
glass of wine, all untouched. Unaffected by the episode with
the investor, he calmly leafs through pages of a report Stern
has prepared for him.
SCHINDLER
I could try to read this or I could
eat my lunch while it's still hot.
We're doing well?
STERN
Yes.
SCHINDLER 
36.
Better this month than last?
STERN
Yes.
SCHINDLER
Any reason to think next month will
be worse?
STERN
The war could end.
No chance of that. Satisfied, Schindler returns the report to
his accountant and starts to eat. Stern knows he is excused,
but looks like he wants to say something more.
SCHINDLER
(impatient)
What?
STERN
There's a machinist outside who'd
like to thank you personally for
giving him a job.
Schindler gives his accountant a long-suffering look.
STERN
He asks every day. It'll just take
a minute. He's very grateful.
Schindler's silence says, Is this really necessary? Stern
pretends it's a tacit okay, goes to the door and pokes his
head out.
STERN
Mr. Lowenstein?
An old man with one arm appears in the doorway and Schindler
glances to the ceiling, to heaven. As the man slowly makes
his way into the room, Schindler sees the bruises on his
face. And when he speaks, only half his mouth moves; the
other half is paralyzed.
LOWENSTEIN
I want to thank you, sir, for
giving me the opportunity to work.
SCHINDLER
You're welcome, I'm sure you're
doing a great job.
Schindler shakes the man's hand perfunctorily and tells Stern
with a look, Okay, that's enough, get him out of here.
37.
LOWENSTEIN
The SS beat me up. They would have
killed me, but I'm essential to the
war effort, thanks to you.
SCHINDLER
That's great.
LOWENSTEIN
I work hard for you. I'll continue
to work hard for you.
SCHINDLER
That's great, thanks.
LOWENSTEIN
God bless you, sir.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, okay.
LOWENSTEIN
You're a good man.
Schindler is dying, and telling Stern with his eyes, Get this
guy out of here. Stern takes the man's arm.
STERN
Okay, Mr. Lowenstein.
LOWENSTEIN
He saved my life.
STERN
Yes, he did.
LOWENSTEIN
God bless him.
STERN
Yes.
They disappear out the door. Schindler sits down to his meal.
And tries to eat it.
EXT. FACTORY - LATER - DAY
Stern and Schindler emerge from the rear of the factory. The
limousine is waiting, the back door held open by a driver.
Climbing in -
SCHINDLER
Don't ever do that to me again.
38.
(MORE)
STERN
Do what?
Stern knows what he means. And Schindler knows he knows.
SCHINDLER
Close the door.
The driver closes the door.
EXT. GHETTO GATE - DAY
Snow on the ground and more coming down. A hundred of
Schindler's workers marching past the ghetto gate, as is the
custom, under armed guard. Turning onto Zablocie Street,
they're halted by an SS unit standing around some trucks.
EXT. ZABLOCIE STREET - DAY
Shovels scraping at snow; the D.E.F. workers clearing it from
the street. A dialog between one of the guards and an SS
officer is interrupted by a shot - and the face of the onearmed
machinist falls into frame.
TOFFEL (V.O.)
It's got nothing to do with
reality, Oskar, you know it and I
know it -
INT. TOFFEL'S OFFICE, SS HQ - DAY
Herman Toffel, the SS contact of Schindler's he actually
likes, sits behind his desk.
TOFFEL
- It's a matter of national
priority to some of them. It's got
a ritual significance to them, Jews
shoveling snow.
SCHINDLER
I lost a day of production. I lost
a worker. I expect to be
compensated.
TOFFEL
File a grievance with the Economic
office, it's your right.
SCHINDLER
Would it do any good?
TOFFEL 
39.
(MORE)
No.
Schindler knows it's not Toffel's fault, but the whole
situation is maddening to him. He shakes his head in disgust.
TOFFEL
I think you're going to have to put
up with a lot of snow shoveling
yet.
Schindler gets up, shakes Toffel's hand, turns to leave.
TOFFEL
A one-armed machinist, Oskar?
SCHINDLER
(right back) )
He was a metal press operator,
quite skilled.
Toffel smiles, Sure.
EXT. FOREST ROAD - DAY
To the melody of "Old Tannenbaum," Schindler's driver, axe in
his hand, trails after his boss who's walking along the side
of the road considering the trees lining it.
JUMP CUT TO:
- clumps of snow falling from the top of the tree Schindler
has picked - a thirty-footer as his driver hacks at its
trunk. The MUSIC continues over:
INT. FACTORY - DAY
Schindler moving past the tree, beautifully trimmed with
decorations, handing out fistsful of cigarettes to the
workers, wishing them a merry Christmas.
INT. D.E.F. FRONT OFFICE - DAY
Amid more Christmas decorations, Schindler's many secretaries
open presents from him. Klonowska's at her desk, her eyes
closed tight.
SCHINDLER
All right.
She opens her eyes and smiles. Schindler is holding a poodle
in his arms. As she comes around to kiss him, he sets the dog
on the desk, and Stern, across the room, watches blank-faced.
GESTAPO (O.S.)
40.
(MORE)
Oskar Schindler?
Schindler, Stern, Klonowska and the others turn to the voice.
Two Gestapo men have entered unannounced.
GESTAPO
We have a warrant to take your
company's business records with us.
And another to take you.
Schindler stares at them in disbelief. Stern quietly slips
one of the ledgers on his desk into a drawer.
SCHINDLER
Am I permitted to have my secretary
cancel my appointments for the day?
He doesn't wait for their approval. He scribbles down some
names - Toffel, Czurda, Reeder, Scherner. Underlining
Scherner, he glances to Klonowska. She understands.
INT. GESTAPO CAR - MOVING - DAY
Schindler lounges in the back seat, watching Pomorska Street
and SS Headquarters coming into view.
INT OFFICE, SS HEADQUARTERS, CRACOW - DAY
A humorless middle-level bureaucrat sits behind a desk and
D.E.F.'s ledgers and cashbooks.
BUREAUCRAT
You live very well.
The man slowly shakes his head 'no' to Schindler's offer of a
cigarette. Schindler tamps it against the crystal of his gold
watch.
BUREAUCRAT
This standard of living comes
entirely from legitimate sources, I
take it?
Schindler lights the cigarette and drags on it, all but
ignoring the man.
BUREAUCRAT
As an SS supplier, you have a moral
obligation to desist from
blackmarket dealings. You're in
business to support the war effort,
not fatten your -
SCHINDLER
41.
(MORE)
(interrupting)
You know? When my friends ask, I'd
love to be able to tell them you
treated me with the utmost courtesy
and respect.
The quiet matter-of-fact tone, more than the comment itself,
throws the bureaucrat off his rhythm. His eyes narrow
slightly as he wonders, perhaps, Just who Schindler's
"friends" might be. There's a long silence.
INT. HALLWAY / ROOM - SS HEADQUARTERS - DAY
The two who arrested him lead Schindler down a long hallway.
They reach a door, have him step inside and close the door
after him.
Inside, Schindler smiles. There are thin drapes over the
barred windows, toiletries laid out on the washbasin. If this
is a cell, it's a cell for dignitaries.
INT. SS "CELL" - EVENING
Schindler knocks on the inside of the door. A Waffen SS man
opens it. The "prisoner" peels several bills from a thick
wad.
SCHINDLER
Chances of getting a bottle of
vodka pretty good?
He hands the young guard five times the going price.
WAFFEN GUARD
Yes, sir.
The guard turns to leave.
SCHINDLER
Wait a minute.
He peels off several more bills and hands them over.
SCHINDLER
Pajamas.
INT. SS "CELL" - MORNING
Perched on the side of the bed in pajamas, Schindler works on
a breakfast of herring and eggs, cheeses, rolls and coffee.
Someone has also brought him a newspaper. There's an
apologetic knock on the door before it opens.
GUARD 
42.
I'm sorry to disturb you, sir.
Whenever you're ready, you're free
to leave.
INT. FOYER, SS HEADQUARTERS - MORNING
The guard leads Schindler across the foyer. Waiting for him
near the front doors of the building are the bureaucrat and
the arresting officers. Reaching them -
BUREAUCRAT
I'd advise you not to get too
comfortable. Sooner or later, law
prevails. No matter who your
friends are.
Schindler ignores him completely. The man tries to turn over
the D.E.F. records to their owner, but Schindler makes no
move to take them.
SCHINDLER
Do you expect me to walk home?
An awkward silence as the others look to the clerk.
Eventually, to the arresting officer -
BUREAUCRAT
Bring a car around for Mr.
Schindler.
EXT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
A Gestapo limousine pulls in through the gates of the
factory, parks near the loading docks. The driver-arresting
officer waits for Schindler to climb out, but he doesn't; he
waits for the officer to come around and open the door for
him.
SCHINDLER
If you'd return the ledgers to my
office I'd appreciate it.
There are no less than forty able-bodied Jewish laborers
working on the docks, any one of which would be better suited
to the task. The SS man calls to one of them.
SCHINDLER
Excuse me - hey -
(the SS man turns)
They're working.
The guy just stares. Finally he heads off with the ledgers.
The poodle bounds out past him and over to Schindler. He
gives the dog a pat on the head.
43.
EXT. SCHINDLER'S BUILDING - EVENING
Elegantly dressed for a night out, Schindler and Klonowska
emerge from the building. As they're escorted to the waiting
car, Schindler hesitates. Pfefferberg, in the shadows of an
alcove, is gesturing to him, beckoning him.
Schindler excuses himself. Klonowska watches as he joins the
man in the alcove. Their whispered conversation is over
quickly and Pfefferberg hurries off.
EXT. PROKOCIM DEPOT - CRACOW - LATER - NIGHT
From the locomotive, looking back, the string of slatted
livestock carriages stretches into darkness. There's a lot of
activity on the platform:
Guards mill. Handcarts piled with luggage trundle by. People
hand up children to others already in the cars and climb
aboard after them. The clerks are out in full force with
their lists and clipboards, reminding the travelers to label
their suitcases.
Climbing from his Mercedes, Schindler stares. He's heard of
this, but actually seeing the juxtaposition - humans and
cattle cars - this is something else.
Recovering, he tells Klonowska to stay in the car and, moving
alongside the train, calls Stern's name to the faces peering
out from behind the slats and barbed wire.
- several pages-worth on a clipboard; a Gestapo clerk
methodically leafing through them.
CLERK
Itzhak Stern?
(Schindler nods)
He's on the list.
SCHINDLER
He is.
The clerk shows him the list, points out the name to him.
SCHINDLER
Well, let's find him.
CLERK
He's on the list. If he were an
essential worker, he would not be
on the list. He's on the list. You
can't have him.
44.
SCHINDLER
I'm talking to a clerk.
Schindler pulls out a small notepad and drops his voice to a
hard murmur, the growl of a reasonable man who isn't ready -
yet - to bring out his heavy guns:
SCHINDLER
What's your name?
CLERK
Sir, the list is correct.
SCHINDLER
I didn't ask you about the list, I
asked you your name.
CLERK
Klaus Tauber.
As Schindler writes it down, the clerk has second thoughts
and calls to a superior, an SS sergeant, who comes over.
CLERK
The gentleman thinks a mistake's
been made.
SCHINDLER
My plant manager is somewhere on
this train. If it leaves with him
on it, it'll disrupt production and
the Armaments Board will want to
know why.
The sergeant takes a good hard look at the clothes, at the
gold Nazi party pin, at the man wearing them.
SERGEANT
(to the clerk)
Is he on the list?
CLERK
Yes, sir.
SERGEANT
(to Schindler)
The list is correct, sir. There's
nothing I can do.
SCHINDLER
May as well get your name while
you're here.
45.
SERGEANT
My name? My name is Kunder.
Sergeant Kunder. What's yours?
SCHINDLER
Schindler.
The sergeant takes out a pad. Now all three of them have
lists. He jots down Schindler's name. Schindler jots down his
and flips the pad closed.
SCHINDLER
Sergeant, Mr. Tauber, thank you
very much. I think I can guarantee
you you'll both be in Southern
Russia before the end of the month.
Good evening.
He walks away, back toward his car. The clerk and sergeant
smile. But slowly, slowly, the smiles sour at the possibility
that this man calmly walking away from them could somehow
arrange such a fate...
ALL THREE OF THEM -
- Schindler, the clerk and the sergeant - stride along the
side of the cars. Two of them are calling out loudly -
CLERK & SERGEANT
Stern! Itzhak Stern!
Wheels grind against track as the train begins to move. The
sergeant and clerk, with some urgency, motion to other clerks
and officers, who, at first puzzled, pick up the chant -
OTHER CLERKS & SS
Stern! Itzhak Stern!
Soon it seems as if everybody except Schindler is yelling out
the name. The faces behind the slats of the livestock cars
begin to blur as the locomotive gains speed.
SCHINDLER
There he is.
The sergeant calls to a brakeman to halt the train, but the
order sinks under the noise of the train. He yells louder and
motions with desperation. The trainman finally acts, running
the length of the platform, blowing at a whistle. The train
slows, and eventually grinds to a halt.
SERGEANT
Open it.
46.
Guards yank at a lever, slide the gate open. Stern climbs
down. The clerk draws a line through his name on the list and
hands the clipboard to Schindler.
CLERK
Initial it, please.
(Schindler initials the
change)
And this...
As Schindler signs three or four forms, the guards slide the
carriage gate closed. Those left inside seem grateful for the
extra space.
CLERK
It makes no difference to us, you
understand - this one, that one.
It's the inconvenience to the list.
It's the paperwork.
Schindler returns the clipboard. The sergeant motions to a
corporal who motions to the engineer. As the train pulls away
from the station, Stern tries to keep up with Schindler who's
striding away.
STERN
I somehow left my work card at
home. I tried to tell them it was a
mistake, but they -
Schindler silences him abruptly with a look. He's livid.
Stern's glance settles on his own shoes.
STERN
I'm sorry, it was stupid.
SCHINDLER
What if I got here five minutes
later?
Looking away to the train disappearing into the night, Stern
nods contritely.
SCHINDLER
Then where would I be?
Stern's glance back wonders whose fate Schindler was more
concerned about - Stern's or his own. Schindler turns away
and heads for the car.
Stern hesitates, then trails after him, passing an area where
all the luggage, carefully tagged, has been left -
47.
EXT/INT. MECHANICS GARAGE - NIGHT
Mechanics' hook-lamps throw down pools of light through which
men wheel handcarts piled high with suitcases, briefcases,
steamer trunks.
Moving along with one of the handcarts into a huge garage
past racks of clothes, each item tagged, past musical
instruments, furniture, paintings. Against one wall -
children's toys, sorted by size.
The cart stops. A valise is handed to someone who dumps and
sorts the contents on a greasy table. The jewelry is taken to
another area, to a pit, one of two deep lubrication bays
filled with watches, bracelets, necklaces, candelabra,
Passover platters, gold in one, silver the other, and tossed
in.
At workbenches, under SS guard, Mordecai Wulken and three
other Jewish jewelers sift and sort and weigh and grade
diamonds, pearls, pendants, brooches and children's rings -
faltering only once, when a uniformed figure upends a box,
spilling out gold teeth smeared with blood.
EXT. COUNTRYSIDE - DAY
Fractured gravestones like broken teeth jut from the earth of
a neglected Jewish cemetery outside of town. Down the road
that runs alongside it comes a German staff car.
INT. STAFF CAR - MOVING - DAY
In the backseat, Untersturmfuhrer Amon Goeth pulls on a flask
of schnapps. His age and build are about that of Schindler's;
his face open and pleasant.
Ignoring the other (lower-ranking) SS officers in the car,
Goeth gazes out the window at the broken tombstones moving
past like a tourist noting a place that might be nice to
return to someday.
EXT. PLASZOW FORCED LABOR SITE - DAY
Outside Cracow, a previously abandoned limestone quarry lies
nestled between two hills. The stone and brick buildings look
like they've been here forever; wooden structures, those that
are up, are built of freshly-cut lumber.
There's a great deal of activity. New construction and
renovation - foundations being poured, rail tracks being
laid, fences and watchtowers going up, heavy segments of huts
- wall panels, eaves sections - being dragged uphill by teams
of bescarved women like some ancient Egyptian industry.
48.
(MORE)
Goeth surveys the site from a knoll, clearly pleased with it.
But then he's distracted by voices - a man's, a woman's -
arguing down where some barracks are being erected.
The woman breaks off the dialog with a disgusted wave of her
hand and stalks back to a half-finished barracks. The man,
one from the car, Hujar, sees Goeth, Knude and Haase coming
down the hill and moves to meet them.
HUJAR
She says the foundation was poured
wrong, she's got to take it down. I
told her it's a barracks, not a
fucking hotel, fucking Jew
engineer.
Goeth watches the woman moving around the shell of the
building, pointing, directing, telling the workers to take it
all down. He goes to take a closer look. She comes over.
ENGINEER
The entire foundation has to be dug
up and repoured. If it isn't, the
thing will collapse before it's
even completed.
Goeth considers the foundation as if he knew about such
things. He nods pensively. Then turns to Hujar.
GOETH
(calmly)
Shoot her.
It's hard to tell which is more stunned by the order, the
woman or Hujar. Both stare at Goeth in disbelief. He gives
her the reason along with a shrug -
GOETH
You argued with my man.
(to Hujar)
Shoot her.
Hujar unholsters his pistol but holds it limply at his side.
The workers become aware of what's happening and still their
hammers.
HUJAR
Sir...
Goeth groans and takes the gun from him and puts it to the
woman's head. Calmly to her -
GOETH
49.
I'm sure you're right.
He fires. She crumples to the ground. He returns the gun to
his stunned inferior and, gesturing down at the body,
addresses the workers:
GOETH
That's somebody who knew what they
were doing. That's somebody I
needed.
(pause)
Take it down, repour it, rebuild
it, like she said.
HE TURNS AND WALKS AWAY.
EXT. STABLES - DAWN
Stable boys lead two horses into the pre-dawn light. The
animals' hoofs shatter tufts of weeds like fingers of glass;
fog plumes from their nostrils.
EXT. PARK, CRACOW - DAWN
Smoke from cigarettes curls into the chilly pre-dawn air.
Sonderkommandos, at ease with the confidence that comes in
knowing they're going into battle without physical risk, that
they can achieve honor without the ordeal of being shot at,
lounge against walls and lampposts and the fenders of idling
trucks, chatting and smoking.
EXT. GHETTO - DAWN
An empty street. Rooftops against a lightening sky. A few of
the windows in the buildings are lighted, glowing amber; the
majority are still dark.
INT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - DAWN
Ingrid, perched on the edge of the bed, pulls on riding
boots. In the bathroom, Schindler brushes shaving soap on his
face and picks up a straight razor -
INT. PRESIDENTIAL SUITE, GRAND HOTEL - DAWN
The blade of a straight razor slides through lather on
Goeth's cheek. He dips it in water and touches it to his skin
again.
EXT. PEACE SQUARE, GHETTO - DAWN
A fourteen year old kid hurries across the square pulling on
his O.D. armband. 
50.
Several others of the Jewish Ghetto Police, Goldberg and
Chilowicz among them, are already assembled there. The
clerks, the list makers, scissor open their folding tables,
set out their ink pads and stamps.
EXT. STABLES - DAWN
The stable boys hoist saddles onto the horses, cinch the
straps. Leaning against the hood of a Mercedes, Schindler and
Ingrid, in long hacking jackets, riding breeches and boots,
share cognac from his flask.
EXT. PARK, CRACOW - DAWN
Untersturmfuhrer Goeth, soon to be Commandant Goeth, stands
before the assembled troops with a flask of cognac in his
hand. He looks out over them proudly; they're good boys,
these, the best. He addresses them -
GOETH
Today is history. The young will
ask with wonder about this day.
Today is history and you're a part
of it.
EXT. STABLES - DAWN
Ingrid climbs onto one of the horses, Schindler onto the
other. As the animals gallop away with their riders toward a
wood, the stable boys wave.
GOETH (V.O.)
Six hundred years ago when,
elsewhere, they were footing the
blame for the Black Death,
Kazimierz the Great, so called,
told the Jews they could come to
Cracow.
EXT. PARK, CRACOW - DAWN
The fresh young faces of the Sonderkommandos, listening to
their commander.
GOETH
They came. They trundled their
belongings into this city. They
settled, they took hold, they
prospered.
EXT. WOODS - DAWN
The horses panting hard. Their hoofs hammering at the ground,
climbing a hill. Riding boots kicking at their flanks.
51.
GOETH
For six centuries, there has been a
Jewish Cracow.
EXT. PARK, CRACOW - DAWN
The boots of Amon Goeth slowly pacing. He stops. Tight on his
face, smiling pleasantly.
GOETH
By this evening, those six
centuries are a rumor. They never
happened. Today is history.
EXT. HILLTOP CLEARING - DAWN
The galloping horses break through to a clearing high on a
hill. The riders pull in the reins and the hoofs rip at the
earth.
Schindler smiles at the view, the beauty of it with the sun
just coming up. From here, all of Cracow can be seen in
striking relief, like a model of a town.
He can see the Vistula, the river that separates the ghetto
from Kazimierz; Wawel Castle, from where the National
Socialist Party's Hans Frank rules the Government General of
Poland; beyond it, the center of town.
He begins to notice refinements: the walls that define the
ghetto; Peace Square, the assembly of men and boys. He
notices a line of trucks rolling east across the Kosciuscko
Bridge, another across the bridge at Podgorze, a third along
Zablocie Street, all angling in on the ghetto like spokes to
a hub.
EXT. GHETTO - DAWN
The wheels of the last truck clear the portals at Lwowska
Street and the Sonderkommandos jump down.
INT. APARTMENT BUILDINGS - DAWN
Families are routed from their apartments. An appeal to be
allowed to pack is answered with a rifle butt; an unannounced
move to a desk drawer is halted by the snap of dog's jaws or
the report of a gun.
EXT. STREETS, GHETTO - DAWN
Spilling out of the buildings, they're herded into lines
without regard to family considerations; 
52.
some other unfathomable system is at work here, something to
do with the "W's" and "Z's" and "R's" stamped across the
workcards the clerks are demanding to see.
INT. PFEFFERBERG'S APARTMENT - DAWN
Throwing on some clothes, Pfefferberg hurries past his young
wife Mila issuing instructions -
PFEFFERBERG
Pack some things. Nothing bigger
than this -
He holds his hands apart chest-width.
PFEFFERBERG
I have to check something out, I'll
be back before you're done.
And he's out the door.
EXT. GHETTO STREET - DAWN
The Dresners are split up - Mr. Dresner to one line, his wife
and daughter Danka to another. A frantic woman's wailing
appeals to join her husband's line are abruptly cut off by a
short burst of gunfire.
EXT. HILLTOP - DAWN
From here, the action down below seems staged, unreal, the
rifle bursts no louder than caps. A man falls to the ground
well before the sound of the shot that killed him arrives.
Dismounting, Schindler moves closer to the edge of the hill,
curious. His attention is drawn to a small distant figure,
all in RED, at the rear of one of the many columns.
EXT. STREET - DAWN
Small red shoes against a forest of gleaming black boots.
A Waffen SS man occasionally corrects three year old Genia's
drift, fraternally it seems, nudging her gently back in line
with the barrel of his rifle. A volley of shots echoes from
up the street.
EXT. STREET - DAWN
Moving with a long line toward an idling truck, Mrs. Dresner
pulls her daughter into an alcove.
53.
EXT. HILLTOP - DAWN
Schindler watches as the girl in red slowly wanders away
unnoticed by the SS. Against the grays of the buildings and
street she's a bright moving target.
EXT. STREET - DAWN
A truck thundering down the street obscures her for a moment.
Then she's moving past a pile of bodies, old people executed
in the street, and Pfefferberg prying off a manhole cover -
INT. SEWERS - DAWN
Pfefferberg descends metal rungs into a sewer tunnel. The
noise from above - the dogs and the trucks and orders shouted
through megaphones - echoes weirdly off the walls.
He comes around a corner and sees light - and figures
silhouetted against it - up ahead. They make it to the end of
the tunnel, by the banks of the Vistula, but are gunned down
by waiting troops as they emerge. Shielding his head from the
stray bullets ricocheting off the walls, Pfefferberg turns
abruptly back the way he came and runs.
INT/EXT. GHETTO APARTMENT - DAWN
A frightened woman ushers her elderly parents into a cavity
behind a false wall. Closing herself into it, she sees Danka
and Mrs. Dresner hurrying into the room and motions to the
girl to get inside. Danka slides past the woman into the nook
and the wall-door closes plunging it into darkness.
DANKA
Mom - ?
Her mother has been intentionally left outside. Too stunned
to move at first, Mrs. Dresner recovers and raps at the wall
and it opens a crack revealing the frightened woman's face.
IRRATIONAL WOMAN
There's not enough room for you.
MRS. DRESNER
What are you talking about, we
tried it, remember? There's more
than enough room.
IRRATIONAL WOMAN
I changed my mind.
54.
(MORE)
The wall closes up again. The bark of Dobermans and the
megaphoned roaring of Oberscharfuhrers echo from up the
street. Mrs. Dresner pounds at the wall and the false door
opens a little again.
MRS. DRESNER
Look at the space in there. Now
look at me. You're just scared -
IRRATIONAL WOMAN
I can fit the girl but not you.
Shots from up the block sweep away the last of the woman's
reason and she slams the wall shut again.
DANKA (O.S.)
Mom? I'm coming out.
MRS. DRESNER
No, stay in there.
Mrs. Dresner hurries out of the room.
EXT. HILLTOP - DAWN
Schindler keeps watching the girl in red, so conspicuous, yet
still moving past crowds, past dogs, past trucks, as though
she were invisible.
EXT. STREET - DAWN
Patients in white gowns, and doctors and nurses in white, are
herded out the doors of a convalescent hospital. As the small
figure in red moves past them, shots explode behind her.
INT. GHETTO APARTMENT BUILDING - CONTINUOUS - DAWN
Mrs. Dresner hurries down the apartment stairs. As she's
nearing the doorway of the building, a figure appears in it
and she stops, paralyzed with fear.
It's a boy, no more than fourteen. Cap on his head, OD
armband, he works for the Germans and is terrifying because
of it. Time seems to stand still as he considers Mrs.
Dresner. Finally -
OD BOY
Aren't you Danka's mother?
Mrs. Dresner nods anxiously; her life is in the hands of a
child.
OD BOY 
55.
They'll be here in a minute, hide
under the stairs.
She does as she's told, and listens to the sound of the boy's
steps out onto the street and -
OD BOY (O.S.)
I've searched the building, there's
no one here.
Peering out from her hiding place, she sees some SS men.
Satisfied with the boy's report, they move on, and Mrs.
Dresner hurries back up the stairs to retrieve Danka.
EXT. HILLTOP - DAWN
Short bursts of light flash throughout the ghetto like stars.
Schindler, fixated still on the figure in red, loses sight of
her as she turns a corner.
EXT/INT. PFEFFERBERG'S APARTMENT - DAWN
Pfefferberg hurries past the girl, into his building and up a
flight of stairs to his apartment.
PFEFFERBERG
Mila?
She's not there. There are no suitcases. She's gone. He
hurries back down the stairs and out onto the street just as
three SS men appear around a corner down the block.
There's nowhere to hide; the second he moves he'll be seen
and probably shot. Trying to think - fast - his glance shifts
to the suitcases littering the street.
Flanked by Hujar and another NCO, Anon Goeth notices the man
stacking suitcases against a wall up ahead. As they draw
near, Pfefferberg turns to face them, clicks his heels and
salutes.
PFEFFERBERG
Sir, I respectfully report I've
been given orders to clear all the
bundles from the road so there'll
be no obstructions to the
thoroughfare, sir.
He clicks his heels again, salutes, remains at attention. All
of which seems to amuse Goeth.
GOETH
Very good saluting.
56.
PFEFFERBERG
Thank you, sir.
GOETH
Finish and join the lines.
PFEFFERBERG
Yes, sir.
Goeth and his men move on, leaving the heel-clicking
Ghettomensch to finish with the bundles. Pfefferberg lets out
the breath he hadn't realized he was holding.
EXT. HILLTOP - DAWN
Schindler catches sight of the girl in red again, moving past
a line of men filing toward and onto trucks.
EXT. STREET - DAWN
Coming around a corner Genia sees ahead, in the middle of the
street, a unit of Sonderkommandos, and beyond them, at the
end of the block, slipping out of a line of men, her uncle
Idek.
Without slowing, her eyes consider the uniformed men, their
backs to her, and the shake of her uncle's head that seems to
be saying, against all his natural impulses, Don't run to me,
don't call out, you'll give yourself away.
Without a knowing look back, indeed as if by instinct, she
keeps moving toward her destination, veering off to it just
short of the Sonderkommandos in the street - her apartment.
INT. APARTMENT BUILDING - DAWN
She climbs the stairs. The building is empty. She steps
inside an apartment and moves through it - it's been
ransacked - and crawls under the bed.
The gunfire outside sounds like firecrackers.
EXT. HILLTOP - NIGHT
Night. Silence. Schindler and Ingrid are gone.
EXT. GHETTO - NIGHT
Broken shop windows. Uninhabited buildings. Bundles and
suitcases strewn across deserted streets like bodies. There's
no movement. No sound. Until -
57.
Several trucks, as before, roll across the Vistula bridge.
They pass through the unmanned ghetto gate and split off down
different streets.
Einsatzgruppe squads (Special-Duty groups) climb down and
move in packs along the streets. Elite and ferocious men,
they wear long overcoats and carry rifles and shotguns.
INT. APARTMENTS - GHETTO - NIGHT
They come up staircases and in through open doors.
Unshouldering their weapons, they listen to the quiet...
before shattering it with gunfire.
EXT. GHETTO STREETS - SAME TIME - NIGHT
Windows up and down the streets flash with light.
INT. APARTMENT - NIGHT
Bullets pepper an attic floor, splinter walls, tear through
cupboards and pantries, searching for unseen targets,
exploding from the muzzles of the Einsatzgruppen's weapons.
As the last shot echoes into temporary silence, the men are
already out the door, on their way to the next apartment.
Just before shots ring out there, blood, here, seeps from the
holes in the ceiling and the walls and the cupboard doors.
EXT. HILLTOP - NIGHT
Below, the ghetto perimeter and interior are clearly
distinguishable by the dots of light flashing in the windows
of the apartments.
Gradually they diminish in number until the last shot is
finally fired and the ghetto disappears into darkness, like a
void in the city of Cracow. Outside its boundaries, lights,
from lamps not guns, glimmer.
INT. D.E.F. FACTORY - NIGHT
Tables and tools and enamelware scrap. The metal presses and
lathes, still. The firing ovens, cold. The gauges at zero.
Against the wall of windows overlooking the empty factory
floor, stands a figure, Schindler, in silhouette against the
glass, black against white, not moving, just staring down.
FADE TO BLACK.
58.
(MORE)
EXT. FOREST - PLASZOW - DAWN
Bloody wheelbarrows, stark against the tree line of a forest
above the completed forced labor camp, PLASZOW.
EXT. APPELLPLATZ (PARADE GROUND) PLASZOW - DAWN
Names on lists. Names called out. Tight on faces.
Goldberg at one of several folding tables. The black
marketeer-turned-ghetto-co is now the Lord of Lists inside
Plaszow. He and other listmakers call out names, accounting
for the fifteen thousand who survived the liquidation of the
ghetto and now stand in long straight rows.
Stern is among them.
INT. GOETH'S BEDROOM, PLASZOW - MORNING
Amon Goeth stirs, wakes, glances at the woman asleep beside
him. Hungover, he drags himself slowly out of bed.
EXT. GOETH'S BALCONY - MOMENTS LATER - MORNING
Goeth steps out onto the balcony in his undershirt and shorts
and peers out across the labor camp, his labor camp, his
kingdom. Satisfied with it, even amazed, he's reminiscent of
Schindler looking down on his kingdom, his factory, as he
loves to do, from his wall of glass.
Life is great. Goeth reaches for a rifle.
EXT. PLASZOW - SAME TIME - MORNING
Workers loading quarry rock onto trolleys under Ukrainian
guard and a low morning sun. Every so often, one glances with
anticipation to the balcony of Goeth's villa - which is in
fact nothing more than a two-story stone house perched on a
slight rise in the dry landscape.
EXT. GOETH'S BALCONY - CONTINUED - MORNING
The butt of the rifle against his shoulder, Goeth aims down
at the quarry - at this worker, at that one indiscriminately,
inscrutably. He fires a shot and a distant figure falls.
INT. GOETH'S BEDROOM - SAME TIME - MORNING
The woman in bed groans at the echoing shot. She's used to it
but she still hates it; it's such an awful way to be woken.
MAJOLA
(mutters)
59.
MAJOLA(CONT'D)
Amon... Christ...
She buries her head under a pillow. Goeth reappears. He pads
to his bathroom, goes inside and urinates.
EXT. PLASZOW - DAY
Schindler's Mercedes winds through the camp on a road made
entirely of broken tombstones scavenged from the Jewish
cemetery.
As it passes warehouses and workshops, barracks and guard
blocks and work details, some of the workers from Schindler's
factory can be glimpsed among the prisoners. A man standing
alone wears a sign around his neck (subtitle), "I am a potato
thief."
The Mercedes pulls in next to some other nice cars parked
alongside Goeth's villa.
INT. GOETH'S VILLA - DAY
A table set with crystal, china, silver. Goeth and Leo John
are there, in pressed SS uniforms, and two industrialists,
Bosch and Madritsch. one chair is empty.
LEO JOHN
Your machinery will be moved and
installed by the SS at no cost to
you. You'll pay no rent, no
maintenance -
John glances off, interrupted by Schindler's arrival.
Although he's never been here, the industrialist comes in
like he owns the place. All but Goeth rise.
SCHINDLER
No, no, come on, sit.
He works his way around the table, patting Bosch and
Madritsch on the back - he knows them - shaking John's hand,
who he doesn't know. He reaches Goeth.
SCHINDLER
How're you doing?
Goeth takes a good long look at the handsomely dressed
entrepreneur and allows him to shake his hand.
GOETH
We started without you.
SCHINDLER
Good.
60.
(MORE)
Schindler takes a seat, shakes a napkin onto his lap, nods to
a servant holding out a bottle of champagne to him.
SCHINDLER
Please.
Goeth watches him. The others watch Goeth.
SCHINDLER
I miss anything important?
LEO JOHN
(pause)
I was explaining to Mr. Bosch and
Mr. Madritsch some of the benefits
of moving their factories into
Plaszow.
SCHINDLER
Oh, good, yeah.
Schindler clearly doesn't care, but nods as though he did. He
drinks. Goeth just watches him with what seems to be growing
amusement. He nods to John to continue.
LEO JOHN
Since your labor is housed on-site,
it's available to you at all times.
You can work them all night if you
want. Your factory policies,
whatever they've been in the past,
they'll continue to be, they'll be
respected -
Schindler laughs out loud, cutting John off, and starts in on
the plate of food that's set down in front of him. John
glances over to Goeth nonplussed. To Schindler -
GOETH
You know, they told me you were
going to be trouble - Czurda and
Scherner.
SCHINDLER
You're kidding.
Goeth slowly shakes his head no... then smiles.
GOETH
He looks great, though, doesn't he?
I have to know - where do you get a
suit like that? What is that, silk?
(Schindler nods)
61.
GOETH(CONT'D)
It's great.
SCHINDLER
I'd say I'd get you one but the man
who made it's probably dead, I
don't know.
He shrugs like, Those are the breaks, too bad. Goeth just
smiles. The others watch the two of them, unsure how they're
supposed to react.
GOETH
Something wonderful's happened, do
you know what it is?
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - LATER - DAY
The others have gone. It's just Goeth and Schindler now.
Goeth pours glasses of cognac.
GOETH
- Without planning it, we've
reached that happy point in our
careers where duty and financial
opportunity meet.
Schindler nods pensively, perhaps in agreement, perhaps at
some other thought. There's a silence, broken finally by -
SCHINDLER
I go to work the other day, there's
nobody there. Nobody tells me about
this, I have to find out, I have to
go in, everybody's gone -
GOETH
They're not gone, they're here.
SCHINDLER
They're mine.
His roar echoes into silence. An acquiescent shrug from Goeth
finally, and a nod; Schindler's right.
SCHINDLER
Every day that goes by, I'm losing
money. Every worker that is shot,
costs me money - I have to get
somebody else, I have to train themGOETH
We're going to be making so much
money, none of this is going to
matter -
62.
SCHINDLER
(cutting him off)
It's bad business.
They study each other, trying to determine perhaps who's more
powerful. Eventually, Goeth shrugs.
GOETH
Some of the boys went crazy,
what're you going to do? You're
right, it's bad business, but it's
over with, it's done.
(pause)
Occasionally, sure, okay, you have
to make an example. But that's good
business.
He glances off to his maid coming in quietly with a tray of
sweets. There's a bruise on her face. She sets the tray down
carefully, trying to avoid clatter, and looks to Goeth for
further instructions.
GOETH
Thank you, Helen.
He smiles pleasantly, watches after her as she leaves,
genuinely fond of her it seems. Glancing back to his guest -
GOETH
Scherner told me something else
about you.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, what's that?
GOETH
That you know the meaning of the
word gratitude. That it's not some
vague thing with you like it is to
others.
Schindler nods, That's true. Goeth tries to put the situation
in perspective:
GOETH
You want to stay where you are. You
got things going on the side,
things are good, you don't want
anybody telling you what to do - I
can understand all that.
(pause)
What you want is your own sub-camp.
63.
Schindler admits it by not disagreeing. Goeth thinks about
it, nods to himself again, then frowns.
GOETH
Do you have any idea what's
involved? The paperwork alone?
Forget you got to build it all,
getting the fucking permits, that's
enough to drive you crazy. Then the
engineers show up. They stand
around and they argue about
drainage - I'm telling you, you'll
want to shoot somebody, I've been
through it, I know.
SCHINDLER
Well, you've been through it. You
know. You could make things easier
for me.
Goeth mulls it over, his shrug saying "maybe, maybe not." A
silence before -
SCHINDLER
I'd be grateful.
There's the word Goeth was waiting to hear.
EXT. D.E.F. SUBCAMP SITE - DAY
An SS surveyor measures with even paces a distance of the
bare field adjacent to the factory. He sticks a little flag
into the ground.
At a folding table set down in the middle of the field,
Schindler signs a check made out to the Construction Office,
Plaszow, tears it from the large book and hands it and a
stack of requisitions to an SS building contractor.
EXT. CONSTRUCTION OFFICE, PLASZOW - DAY
The check and requisitions on a clipboard in Wilek
Chilowicz's hands. The Jewish gangster has apparently
achieved a status of some importance here already, and moves
along trucks being loaded with lumber and cement, electrical
and plumbing supplies and rolls of barped wire. Goeth
appears, comes over.
CHILOWICZ
Schindler.
Goeth nods to himself, reaches for the clipboard and browses
through the paperwork.
64.
EXT. COUNTRYSIDE - DAY
A convoy of six trucks moving along a narrow road lined with
trees. At a fork, three split off to the left, the other
three to the right.
EXT. D.E.F. SUBCAMP SITE - DAY
Checking the building supplies being off-loaded from three
trucks against carbons of the requisitions on his clipboard,
the contractor glances over to one of the drivers.
SS CONTRACTOR
Where's the rest?
EXT. FARM - DAY
The rest is being handed down from the other three trucks and
carried into a barn where a man, who looks nothing like a
farmer, is paying Chilowicz for the delivery in cash.
EXT. D.E.F. SUBCAMP SITE - DAY
Schindler at the folding table writing out another check. The
contractor approaches, clipboard in hand and reports.
SS CONTRACTOR
They only brought half of what you
paid for.
Before the statement's out of the man's mouth, Schindler
tears the signed check from the book and hands it over
without a look or a word.
EXT. CONSTRUCTION OFFICE, PLASZOW - DAY
The new check on Chilowicz's clipboard. Three more trucks
being loaded. Goeth appears again, is handed the cash by his
bagman Chilowicz, and walks away. T*u
EXT. D.E.F. SUBCAMP SITE - DAY
A watchtower, half-erected, the little flag still in the
ground. Laborers hammer at it while others roll out barbed
wire fencing. A surveyor supervises the placement of a post
and carefully measures its height; it has to be nine feet,
exactly. Schindler and an SS officer come past some SS
architects groaning over a set of blueprints.
SS OFFICER
You have the Poles beat the Czechs,
you have the Czechs beat the Poles,
that way everybody stays in line.
65.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER
All I have is Jews.
He shrugs, Too bad, what're you going to do? The SS officer
frowns. Yeah, that's a problem. Two huge dogs on leashes yank
another SS man across their path.
EXT. D.E.F. - DAY
As five hundred Plaszow prisoners are marched back onto the
grounds of Emalia, any hope they may have had of a more
amicable environment is quickly dashed. The place - completed
now - looks like a fortress: barbed-wire, towers, and dogs.
Flanked by armed SS guards, Schindler watches impassively as
the workers, the Dresners among them, pass through the
factory gates. But as the last of them straggles in, and
Stern is not among them, Schindler's stoicism is betrayed by
concern.
INT. GOETH'S VILLA - NIGHT
The Rosner brothers in evening clothes, Leo on accordion,
Henry on violin, playing a Strauss melody, trying to keep it
muted, inoffensive. Few of the guests pay attention, which is
fine with them.
LEO JOHN
- she's seventy years old, she's
been there forever - they bomb her
house. Everything's gone. The
furniture, everything.
SCHINDLER
(well aware the men is
lying)
Thank God she wasn't there.
LEO JOHN
Thank God she wasn't there.
Schindler, with yet another girl on his arm, endures the
officer's lies while sweeping the room with his eyes.
LEO JOHN
I was thinking maybe you could help
her out. Some plates and mugs, some
stew pots, I don't know. Say half a
gross of everything?
Schindler looks at him for the first time, knowingly.
SCHINDLER 
66.
She run an orphanage, your aunt?
LEO JOHN
She's old. What she can't use maybe
she can sell.
Schindler's girl excuses herself to get a drink.
SCHINDLER
You want it sent directly to her or
through you?
LEO JOHN
Through me, I think. I'd like to
enclose a card.
Schindler nods, Done. Both watch his date across the room
getting a drink. As usual, she's the best-looking one there.
LEO JOHN
Your wife must be a saint.
Whatever tolerance Schindler's had up to this point with John
leaves his face; the look he gives him now is pure contempt.
SCHINDLER
She is.
INT. GOETH'S VILLA - LATER - NIGHT
Helen the maid moves around the important end of the table
carefully setting down appetizers of herring in sauce.
There's a fresh bruise on her face.
GOETH
Ladies and gentlemen, may I
introduce Helen. After three months
with me I'm proud to say she's now
doing well in cuisine and
deportment.
Goeth's girl tonight, a Polish prostitute, eighteen,
nineteen, deadpans as she dips a fork into the herring -
GOETH'S GIRL
I can see she's had a collision
with the kitchen furniture.
The others at the table - Czurda and Leo John and their
girlfriends - smile. Schindler doesn't, but also doesn't
protest. Czurda's girl places a hand on his sleeve.
CZURDA'S GIRL
You're not a soldier?
67.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER
No, dear.
CZURDA
There's a picture. Private
Schindler? Blanket around his
shoulders over in Kharkov?
Everyone laughs.
GOETH
Happened to what's his name - up in
Warsaw - and he was bigger than
you, Oskar.
CZURDA
Toebbens.
GOETH
Happened to Toebbens. Almost.
Himmler goes up to Warsaw, tells
the armaments men, "Get the fucking
Jews out of Toebbens' factory and
put Toebbens in the Army," and -
"and sent him to the Front." I
mean, the Front.
Everybody laughs.
GOETH
It's true. Never happen in Cracow,
though, we all you too much.
SCHINDLER
I pay you too much.
Another round of laughs, only this time it's forced.
Everybody knows it's true, but you don't say it out loud, and
Schindler knows better. Goeth gives him a look; they'll talk
later.
EXT. GOETH'S VILLA - LATER - NIGHT
Goeth finds Schindler alone outside smoking a cigarette.
Schindler acknowledges him, but that's about it. Finally -
SCHINDLER
You held back Stern. You held back
the most important man to my
business.
GOETH 
68.
(MORE)
If he's important to your business,
he's important to mine. He's going
to work for me.
SCHINDLER
What do you want for him, I'll give
it to you.
GOETH
I want him.
(turning back)
Come on, let's go inside, let's
have a good time.
Goeth heads back inside. Schindler stays outside, finishing
his cigarette.
EXT. PLASZOW - LATER - NIGHT
A folding table outside the prisoners' barracks. At it,
playing cards, two night sentries. A figure appears out of
the darkness. Schindler. He sets a fifth of vodka down on the
table.
EXT. BARRACKS - LATER - NIGHT
Stern has been summoned from his barracks. As Schindler digs
through his pockets and hands over tins of food scavenged
from the party, Stern offers back in a hushed tone -
STERN
There are two sets of ledgers. One
showing our actual income and
expenditures, and another, in the
middle drawer of my desk, I keep in
case we're audited again.
Schindler nods, he understands. Over at the table, drinking
his vodka, sit the sentries. From the hill, the villa, the
Rosners' music, faint, can be heard.
STERN
In the lower drawer there's a list
of our black market contacts.
Whether we're buying or selling,
make sure there's no paperwork, no
invoices, no receipts, no -
SCHINDLER
Yeah, I know.
He gets the picture. Stern searches the dark sky for more.
STERN 
69.
(MORE)
There's a calendar on my desk. Put
it on your desk, it's got the
birthdays of our SS friends' wives
and children. Don't forget to send
something.
Schindler smiles faintly. His pockets are empty; and Stern's
hands full of the things Schindler has brought him.
SCHINDLER
Is that it?
Stern shrugs, Yeah, it's all he can think of now. They stand
around a moment more before Schindler turns to leave, to
return to the party.
STERN
Oskar.
(Schindler glances back)
Don't let the things fall apart. I
worked too hard.
(Schindler forces a smile)
Good luck.
SCHINDLER
(pause)
I couldn't get you out of here,
Stern. I tried.
STERN
I know.
Stern shrugs, You did what you could, and turns to go back
into his barracks. Schindler watches after him, then leaves.
INT. VILLA - MORNING
Rebecca Tannenbaum, 19, climbs the stairs behind Helen like
the condemned up gallows planks. Quietly matter of fact -
HELEN
From some people he expects a
professional manner. From others he
finds it cloying. You have to be
good at your job, but not so good
that it appears you're
irreplaceable.
They reach the landing and pass a doorway where the younger
girl glimpses the Commandant moving around dressing. As they
continue along the hallway -
HELEN
The longer you're with him, the 
70.
HELEN(CONT'D)
more you see there's no real rules
you can keep to. You can't say to
yourself, If I follow these rules,
I'll be safe.
They reach another, narrower and creaking set of stairs and
climb it.
HELEN
The last girl's things are in here.
INT. VILLA ATTIC - CONTINUOUS - DAY
An almost bare room full of light. A young prisoner with a
tape measure, pulling it along the baseboards and making
notations on a drafting board.
Helen and Rebecca come through past discarded frames of old
beds and broken-framed paintings to a wash basin under which
the maid finds a small wooden box.
HELEN
All I can say is be careful your
hand doesn't slip.
She hands Rebecca the box and leaves. Inside it, the girl
finds nail clippers and files, cuticle scissors and buffers,
clear polish and remover.
As she cleans the instruments with soap and water, the young
man watches her. He measures the windows and the height of
the ceiling, the silence broken only by the splash of water
in the sink, until -
JOSEF BAU
Well, I may as well measure you
while I'm here.
Rebecca turns from her work and stares at him like he must be
mad.
JOSEF BAU
For a coat. I have friends in the
uniform factory.
REBECCA
(uneasy)
I don't need a coat.
JOSEF BAU
You will in a couple of months.
Then you'll thank me.
71.
He comes over and stretches his measure from her shoulder to
her wrist. Moving around behind her, he draws it from the
nape of her neck to the small of her spine and she tenses. He
comes around in front of her again and, winding his arms
around her in order to measure her waist, she gasps - not at
his touch, but at a sound like the click of a gun hammer -
Her startled glance finds Goeth's two large hounds, Ralf and
Rolf, staring from the doorway like evil apparitions,
shifting their weight from one clawed paw to another.
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - LATER
Rebecca takes the other beast, the human one, gently by the
hand. Eyes closed, enjoying the sensation Goeth can't see the
absolute terror in the girl's face as she pushes back with
trembling hands the cuticle of his thumb and snips at the
dead skin with little scissors. Nearby, the dogs languish on
a Persian carpet.
REBECCA
(carefully) )
You have very nice fingers. Long,
like a pianist.
Goeth's eyes slit to consider her and the comment itself,
trying to decide, no doubt, whether it's punishable for being
too much. Rebecca tries not to look at the service revolver
resting in his other hand on the Louis the Fourteenth end
table. The eyes slowly close again.
INT/EXT. METALWORKS - PLASZOW - DAY
Goeth moves through the crowded metalworks like a goodnatured
foreman, nodding to this worker, wishing that one a
good morning. He seems satisfied, even pleased, with the
level of production. Goldberg moves alongside him with a list
on a clipboard. They reach a particular bench, a particular
worker, and Goeth smiles pleasantly.
GOETH
What are you making?
Not daring to look up, all the worker sees of Goeth is the
starched cuff of his shirt and his long, fine fingers.
LEVARTOV
Hinges, sir.
The rabbi-turned-metalworker gestures with his head to some
hinges on the floor. Goeth nods. And in a tone more like a
friend than anything else -
72.
GOETH
I've got some workers coming in
tomorrow... Where the hell they
from again?
GOLDBERG
Yugoslavia.
GOETH
Yugoslavia. I've got to make room.
He shrugs apologetically and pulls out a pocket watch.
GOETH
Make me a hinge.
As Goeth times him, Rabbi Levartov works at making a hinge as
though his life depended on it - which it does - cutting the
pieces, wrenching them together, smoothing the edges, all the
while keeping count in his head of the seconds ticking away.
He finishes and lets it fall onto the others on the floor.
Forty seconds.
GOETH
Another.
Again the rabbi works feverishly - cutting, crimping,
sanding, hearing the seconds ticking in his head - and
finishing in thirty-five. Goeth nods, impressed.
GOETH
That's very good. What I don't
understand, though, is - you've
been working since what, about six
this morning? Yet such a small pile
of hinges?
He understands perfectly. So does Levartov; he has just
crafted his own death in exactly 75 seconds. No one looks up
from their work as Goeth leads the rabbi past their benches
and out the door.
He stands Levartov against a low wall, and adjusts his
shoulders. Behind the condemned man, workers pushing stone
trolleys veer to the edges of the angle of probable
trajectory of stray bullets before Goeth pulls out his
pistol. He sets the barrel against the rabbi's head and pulls
the trigger - click.
GOETH
(mumble)
Christ -
73.
Annoyed, Goeth extracts the bullet-magazine, slaps it back in
and puts the barrel back against Levartov's head. He pulls
the trigger again and the rabbi's head sways as if it could
absorb the impact of the bullet like a punch. Again there's
only a click.
GOETH
God damn it -
He slams the weapon across Levartov's face and the rabbi
slumps dazed to the ground. Looking up into Goeth's face, he
knows it's not over. As Goeth walks away with faulty gun -
EXT. PLASZOW - DAY
A gold lighter in Schindler's hand flames a cigarette.
SCHINDLER
The guy can turn out a hinge in
less than a minute? Why the long
story?
He hands the gold lighter to Stern and walks away toward a
D.E.F. truck being loaded with supplies.
INT. ADMINISTRATION OFFICE, PLASZOW - DAY
Goldberg lights a cigarette with the same gold lighter, sets
it on the clutter of personnel lists, transport lists, work
and train schedules on his desk, and types on a transfer form
the letters D.E.F.
INT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
Rabbi Levartov, brought over to Emalia, works at a table with
several others crimping metal. As Schindler strolls by, he
dares to speak -
LEVARTOV
Thank you, sir.
Schindler has to think a moment before he can figure out who
the grateful man is.
SCHINDLER
Oh, yeah. You're welcome.
EXT. PLASZOW - DAY
A dead chicken dangling from Hujar's hand, evidence of some
kind. Goeth slowly pacing before a work detail of twenty or
so men standing still, silent, in a row.
74.
GOETH
Nobody knows who stole the chicken.
A man walks around with a chicken,
nobody notices this.
No one confesses. Goeth nods, All right, takes a rifle from a
guard and shoots one of the workers at random. With this
added incentive, he waits for someone to tell him who stole
the chicken. No one does.
GOETH
Still nobody knows.
He shrugs, okay, points the rifle at another worker - and a
boy of fourteen, shuddering and weeping, steps out of line.
GOETH
There we go.
Goeth goes over to the boy, and, like a distant relative to a
small child, tries to get him to look at his face.
GOETH
It was you? You committed this
crime?
BOY
No, Sir.
GOETH
You know who, though.
The boy nods, weeps, screams -
BOY
Him!
He's pointing at the dead man. And Goeth astonishes the
entire assembly of workers and guards by believing the boy.
He returns the rifle to the guard and walks away. Hujar
stares after him, then knowingly at the boy.
EXT. ADMINISTRATION BUILDING - PLASZOW - DAY
Stern on Schindler's heels who's moving briskly toward his
car like he's late for a meeting somewhere.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, sure, bring him over.
75.
INT. D.E.F. - DAY
Schindler comes down the stairs with Klonowska. As they're
crossing through the factory -
BOY
Thank you, sir.
SCHINDLER
(distracted)
You're welcome.
INT. MECHANICS' GARAGE - PLASZOW - DAY
A mechanic leaning over the hood of Goeth's car accidentally
knocks a wrench off the radiator into the fan, and there's an
awful clatter before the engine dies. Pfefferberg, working on
a truck engine, glances over to the expression of pure terror
on the other mechanic's face.
EXT. GOETH'S VILLA - DAY
As servants hoist a heavy, elaborately tooled saddle from
Schindler's trunk - a gift for Goeth - Schindler sees Stern
coming toward him and glances skyward long-sufferingly.
INT. D.E.F. - DAY
The mechanic, making adjustments to a metal press, glances up
as Schindler moves past toward the office stairs.
MECHANIC
Thank -
SCHINDLER
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
EXT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
Across the street stands a nervous young woman in a faded
dress. She seems to be trying to summon the courage to cross
over and onto the factory grounds.
INT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
Just inside the factory, she waits as a guard telephones
Schindler's office. She can see the wall of windows from
where she's standing, and Schindler himself as he appears at
it, phone to his ear. He glances down at her disapprovingly
and the guard hangs up.
GUARD
He won't see you.
76.
(MORE)
INT. APARTMENT - CRACOW - DAY
The woman alone in a dismal room pulling on nylon stockings.
At a mirror, she applies make-up. She slips into a
provocative dress. Puts on heels. A Parisian hat. And looks
in the mirror.
INT. D.E.F. - DAY
Schindler waits for her on the landing of the stairs. He
doesn't recognize her, but smiles to counter the unfortunate
possibility she's some old girlfriend he's forgotten.
Reaching him, she offers her hand.
SCHINDLER
Miss Krause.
MISS KRAUSE
How do you do?
He can tell now she doesn't know him. He seems relieved. He
leads her past Klonowska's desk and into his office.
INT. SCHINDLER'S OFFICE - DAY
He arranges a chair for her, goes to his liquor cabinet.
SCHINDLER
Pernod? Cognac?
MISS KRAUSE
No, thank you.
He pours himself a drink, warms it in his hands, smiles,
clearly taken with her.
SCHINDLER
So. What can I do for you?
The grace with which she's carried herself up to this point
seems to evaporate as she struggles to find the words she
wants.
MISS KRAUSE
They say that no one dies here.
They say your factory is a haven.
They say you are good.
Schindler's face changes like a wall going up, a mask of
indifference like in the portrait of Adolf Hitler on the wall
behind him.
SCHINDLER 
77.
(MORE)
Who says that?
MISS KRAUSE
Everyone.
Schindler glances away from her. He seems weary suddenly,
depressed.
MISS KRAUSE
My name is Regina Perlman, not Elsa
Krause. I've been living in Cracow
on false papers since the ghetto
massacre.
(pause)
My parents are in Plaszow. They're
old. They're killing old people in
Plaszow now. They bury them up in
the forest.
(pause)
I have no money. I borrowed these
clothes. Will you bring them here?
Schindler glances back at her, his face hard, cold, and
studies her for a long, long moment before -
SCHINDLER
I don't do that. You've been
misled. I ask one thing: whether or
not a worker has certain skills.
That's what I ask and that's what I
care about, get out of my office.
She stares at him, frightened and bewildered. She feels tears
welling up.
SCHINDLER
Cry and I'll have you arrested, I
swear to God.
She hurries out.
INT. ADMINISTRATION BUILDING - PLASZOW - DAY
Schindler barges into Stern's office. In a foul and
aggressive mood, he dispenses with pleasantries in order to
admonish the accountant -
SCHINDLER
People die, it's a fact of life.
Stern has hardly had time to look up from the work on his
desk.
SCHINDLER 
78.
(MORE)
He wants to kill everybody? Great,
what am I supposed to do about it?
Bring everybody over? Is that what
you think? Yeah, send them over to
Schindler, send them all. His place
is a "haven," didn't you know? It's
not a factory, it's not an
enterprise of any kind, it's a
haven for rabbis and orphans and
people with no skills whatsoever.
Stern's look is all innocence, but Schindler knows better.
SCHINDLER
You think I don't know what you're
doing? You're so quiet all the
time? I know. I know.
STERN
(with concern)
Are you losing money?
SCHINDLER
No, I'm not losing money, that's
not the point.
STERN
What other point is -
SCHINDLER
(interrupts; yells)
It's dangerous. It's dangerous, to
me.
Silence. Schindler tries to settle down. Pulls a chair over.
Sits in it.
SCHINDLER
You have to understand, Goeth's
under enormous pressure. You have
to think of it in his situation.
He's got this whole place to run,
he's responsible for everything
that goes on here, all these people
- he's got a lot of things to worry
about. And he's got the war. Which
brings out the worst in people.
Never the good, always the bad.
Always the bad. But in normal
circumstances, he wouldn't be like
this. He'd be all right. There'd be
just the good aspects of him. Which
is a wonderful crook. A man who
loves good food, good wine, the 
79.
SCHINDLER(CONT'D)
ladies, making money -
STERN
- killing -
SCHINDLER
I'll admit it's a weakness. I don't
think he enjoys it.
(pause)
All right, he does enjoy it, so
what? What do you expect me to do
about it?
STERN
I don't know, get him to stop.
Schindler sighs either at the predicament itself, or at the
fact that he's allowed Stern to place him right in the middle
of it. He gets up to leave, hesitates. Conducts a mental
search for a name and eventually comes up with it:
SCHINDLER
Perlman -
FLASH CUT to roll call on the crowded Appellplatz -
GOLDBERG
Perlman -
Back to Schindler in Stern's office -
SCHINDLER
Husband and wife -
FLASH CUTS to an elderly man and woman pulled from lines -
GOLDBERG
Jakob and Chana -
Back to Schindler, unstrapping his watch -
SCHINDLER
Have Goldberg bring them over.
FLASH CUT to the watch on Goldberg's wrist as he checks off
the names Jakob and Chana Perlman from his lists.
GOLDBERG
On the truck.
And back to Stern's office as the substantial figure of the
industrialist disappears out the door.
80.
EXT. BALCONY - GOETH'S VILLA - NIGHT
Distant music, Brahms' lullaby, from the Rosner Brothers way
down by the women's barracks calming the inhabitants. Up here
on the balcony, Schindler and Goeth, the latter so drunk he
can barely stand up, stare out over Goeth's dark kingdom.
SCHINDLER
They don't fear us because we have
the power to kill, they fear us
because we have the power to kill
arbitrarily. A man commits a crime,
he should know better. We have him
killed, we feel pretty good about
it. Or we kill him ourselves and we
feel even better. That's not power,
though, that's justice. That's
different than power. Power is when
we have every justification to kill
- and we don't. That's power.
That's what the emperors had. A man
stole something, he's brought in
before the emperor, he throws
himself down on the floor, he begs
for mercy, he knows he's going to
die... and the emperor pardons him.
This worthless man. He lets him go.
That's power. That's power.
It seems almost as though this temptation toward restraint,
this image Schindler has brush-stroked of the merciful
emperor, holds some appeal to Goeth. Perhaps, as he stares
out over his camp, he imagines himself in the role, wondering
what the power Schindler describes might feel like.
Eventually, he glances over drunkenly, and almost smiles.
SCHINDLER
Amon the Good.
EXT. STABLES - PLASZOW - MORNING
A stable boy works to ready Goeth's white horse, anxious to
finish before the Commandant arrives.
INT. GOETH'S VILLA - MORNING
Coming down the stairs in jodhpurs and riding boots, Goeth
pauses to consider a painting. Noticing an imperfection, he
peers more closely. Discovers it's a fly speck. Wipes at it
with a slender manicured finger and glances down to - Helen
dusting in the parlor. She glances up. Sees Goeth staring
down at her accusingly, raging inside, grip tightening on his
riding crop.
81.
The hand comes up and she flinches even though he's twenty
feet away. But the crop doesn't slap against his leg ordering
her impatiently to come forward to receive punishment; it
rolls instead in a gesture for her to keep working. Mystified
by his leniency, suspicious of it, she watches through the
corner of her eye as he continues down the stairs and out the
door.
EXT. PLASZOW - MORNING
Striding toward the stables, Goeth notices in the distance a
woman prisoner being dragged by the hair from the furworks by
a Ukrainian guard. He throws her to the ground and raises his
truncheon, sees the Commandant and calls across to him -
UKRAINIAN
She was smoking on the job.
Without slowing his brisk pace, Goeth nods to himself,
deliberating over the sentence for such a serious crime.
Death perhaps. No. He calls back -
GOETH
Tell her not to do it again.
The guard stares back stunned. So does the woman on the
ground.
INT. STABLES - MORNING
The stable boy sticks a bridle in the horse's mouth, throws a
riding blanket onto its back. As he's dragging over the
saddle Schindler bought e Commandant, Goeth arrives. The boy
tries to hide his panic; he knows others have been shot for
less.
STABLE BOY
I'm sorry, sir, I'm almost done.
GOETH
Oh, that's all right.
As Goeth waits, patiently it seems, humming the theme from
Madam Butterfly to himself, the stable boy tries to mask his
confusion.
EXT. PLASZOW - DAY
Goeth gallops around his great domain holding himself high in
the saddle. But everywhere he looks, it seems, he's
confronted with stoop-shouldered sloth. A worker taking a
rest. Another drinking water. Goeth forces himself to smile
benevolently.
82.
INT. GOETH'S VILLA - DAY
Goeth comes into his bedroom sweating from his ride. A worker
with a pail and cloth appears in the bathroom doorway. More
to the floor -
WORKER
I have to report, sir, I've been
unable to remove the stains from
your bathtub.
Goeth steps past him to take a look. The worker is almost
shaking, he's so terrified of the violent reprisal he expects
to receive.
GOETH
What are you using?
WORKER
Soap, sir.
GOETH
(incredulous)
Soap? Not lye?
The worker hasn't a defense for himself. Goeth's hand drifts
down as if by instinct to the gun in his holster. He stares
at the worker. He so wants to shoot him he can hardly stand
it, right here, right in the bathroom, put some more stains
on the porcelain. He takes a deep breath to calm himself.
Then gestures grandly.
GOETH
Go ahead, go on, leave. I pardon
you.
The worker hurries out with his pail and cloth. Goeth just
stands there for several moments - trying to feel the power
of emperors Schindler described. But he doesn't feel it. No
matter how hard he tries. All he feels is stupid.
EXT. GOETH'S VILLA - MOMENTS LATER - DAY
The worker hurries across the dying lawn outside the villa.
He dares a glance back, and at that moment, a hand with a gun
appears out the bathroom window and fires.
INT. PLASZOW KITCHEN - DAY
Bloody sides of beef lining either side of an ice room.
83.
Idek Schindel comes in, buries a hook into one of the long
carcasses and manages it onto his back. He lumbers out with
it, comes through the industrial kitchen and unshoulders it
onto a block.
As one of the prisoner-cooks cleaves at the meat, Schindel
returns with his hook to get another. Coming into the ice
room again, he stares. One entire wall is bare.
He comes back out. Moves to the back door. Sees a line of
prisoners, under Chilowicz's supervision, carrying twenty
sides of beef, like ants, to a waiting truck.
EXT. CRACOW - DAY
A side of beef and several boxes of vegetables are carried
into the back door of a restaurant. The owner of the place
pays Chilowicz in cash and steps away from the truck filled
with food and furs and peat and paint and bolts of cloth.
INT. PLASZOW KITCHEN - DAY
Cabbages, onions and meat tear under the knives of the
prisoner-cooks.
INT. RESTAURANT KITCHEN, CRACOW - DAY
A solitary chef in starched white clothes and hat dices the
tomatoes, carrots, scallions, mushrooms and meat purloined
from Plaszow and purchased from Chilowicz, arranging it all
in neat piles.
INT. PLASZOW KITCHEN - DAY
The Plaszow cooks upend pots of chopped cabbage and onion and
meat into deep vats. It all falls far to reach the bottom.
INT. RESTAURANT KITCHEN - DAY
The lone restaurant chef rakes his cornucopia of ingredients
into a pot on a stove, holding back some to avoid its
spilling over.
INT. PLASZOW KITCHEN - DAY
The Plaszow cooks pour buckets of water into the vats.
INT. RESTAURANT KITCHEN - DAY
The restaurant cook checks the level of water in a measuring
cup, dumps a little back into the sink and carefully adds the
rest to the pot.
84.
(MORE)
EXT. ROCK QUARRY, PLASZOW - DAY
Tepid watery soup spills into the bowls of the Plaszow quarry
workers as they file past the prisoner-servers.
INT. RESTAURANT - DAY
A waiter comes through the swinging kitchen door into an
elegant dining room with a steaming tureen of soup.
EXT. ROCK QUARRY, PLASZOW - DAY
Under the towering mills, a Plaszow worker spoons at his thin
broth searching for something solid in it. It's like a
treasure hunt.
INT. RESTAURANT - DAY
The waiter ladles rich thick soup into bowls and places them
on plates in front of a well-dressed couple.
WAITER
Bon appetit.
As the woman dips her soup spoon daintily into the bowl and
draws it to her mouth -
STERN (V.O.)
If he didn't steal so much, I could
hide it. If he'd steal with some
discretion.
EXT. BARRACKS, PLASZOW - NIGHT
The sentries at their little table again, drinking
Schindler's vodka. Nearby, outside Stern's barracks,
Schindler hands over items from his coat - loaf of bread, tin
of ham, cigarettes. He's dressed for a party.
STERN
The SS auditors keep coming around,
looking over the books. Goeth knows
this. You'd think he'd have the
common sense to see what's coming.
No. He steals with complete
impunity.
Stern glances across to Goeth's villa on the hill; figures
moving around behind the windows. There's another party going
on up there. Down here, Schindler thinks about what Stern has
told him, and eventually shrugs, Fine, fuck him.
SCHINDLER 
85.
(MORE)
So you'll be rid of him.
But Stern slowly shakes his head 'no'.
STERN
If Plaszow is closed, it's the end
of Emalia, too. They'll close you
both down because of him and send
us all somewhere else.
There's the irony - Schindler's future, his life, is
inextricably enmeshed with Goeth's and his deeds. Schindler
understands the problem, nods.
SCHINDLER
I'll talk to him.
STERN
I think it's too late.
SCHINDLER
Well, I'll talk to somebody. I'll
be certain to take care of it.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CRACOW - EVENING
Schindler and Senior SS Officers Toffel and Scherner share a
table in the same smoke-filled nightclub they met in.
SCHINDLER
What's he done that's so bad - take
money? That's a crime all of a
sudden? Come on, what are we here
for, to fight a war? We're here to
make money, all of us.
TOFFEL
There's taking money and there's
taking money, you know that. He's
taking money.
SCHERNER
The place produces nothing. I
shouldn't say that -- nothing it
produces reaches the Army. Maybe
thirty percent. That's not all
right.
SCHINDLER
So I'll talk to him about it.
SCHERNER
He's a friend of yours, you want to
help him out. Tell me this - has he 
86.
SCHERNER(CONT'D)
ever once shown you his gratitude?
I've yet to see it. Never a
courtesy. Never a thank you note.
He forgets my wife at Christmas
time -
SCHINDLER
He's got no style, we all know
that. So we should hang him for it?
TOFFEL
He's stealing from you, Oskar.
SCHINDLER
Of course he's stealing from me,
we're in business together. What is
this? I'm sitting here, suddenly
everybody's talking like this is
something bad. We take from each
other, we take from the Army,
everybody uses everybody, it works
out, everybody's happy.
SCHERNER
Not like him.
Schindler glances away to the floor show, nods to himself.
Glancing back again, he considers the SS men with great
sobriety.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, well, in some eyes it doesn't
matter the amount we steal, it's
that we do it. Each of us sitting
at this table.
His thinly veiled threat of exposure escapes neither SS man.
The air seems thicker suddenly.
SCHERNER
He doesn't deserve your loyalty,
Oskar. More important, he's not
worth you making threats against
us.
SCHINDLER
Did I threaten anybody here? I
stated a simple fact.
The threat still stands, despite Schindler's assurance
otherwise, and they all know it. So does Scherner's threat
back to him, and they all know that, too. But Schindler just
grins good-naturedly, and, glancing away -
87.
SCHINDLER
Come on, let's watch the girls.
EXT. PLASZOW - EVENING
Applause (from the nightclub) CARRIES OVER work details of
women and girls filing past the electrified fences
separating, like a moat, their barracks from the men's. Many
are whistling short calls, like mockingbirds - each devised
to be distinct from the rest - and straining to pick up the
answering refrains from their mates amid the forest of
sibilance.
Rebecca Tannenbaum whistles her mating call and smiles to
herself when it echoes back not twenty yards behind her.
Glancing over her shoulder down the line she sees among the
women her boyfriend Josef Bau in a scavenged dress and scarf.
The electrified gates spark as guards pull them shut.
INT. CELLAR, GOETH'S VILLA - SAME TIME
The whistling CARRIES OVER a tomb-like room dug into the
earth under the villa. There's a bed, a wash basin, and some
laundry on lines that will never dry completely in the damp
musty air. Rinsing out some socks, Helen turns to the sound
of footsteps and sees Goeth's boots descending the cellar
stairs.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
Schindler sits mesmerized by the beauty of the cabaret singer
on stage, unaware, or unconcerned, that Scherner and Toffel
are watching him, disquieted still by his insinuations.
The singer's voice CARRIES OVER:
INT. HUT 57, WOMEN'S BARRACKS - SAME TIME
The women of Hut 57 at one end of the rows of four-tiered
bunks, crowded together to witness the marriage of Rebecca
Tannenbaum to Josef Bau. There's no rabbi; instead, one of
the older women officiates, reciting the ketubah as best she
can.
Her voice and the nightclub singer's CARRY OVER:
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Goeth parts some hanging sheets, steps through and sits on
the edge of the single bed beside Helen. He's in an
introspective mood, says nothing for several moments, until -
88.
GOETH
Hello, Helen.
HELEN
(uneasy)
Sir.
GOETH
How are you?
HELEN
Fine.
She's not fine at all; she's terrified.
GOETH
Lonely?
She doesn't answer. Goeth stares down, sighs.
GOETH
I am.
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
On the barracks floor, as the old women watch, Rebecca, as
prescribed by the rite, circles her fiance the first of seven
times.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
The cabaret singer steps down from the small stage with the
microphone and begins slowly circling Schindler's table.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Goeth is on his feet, slowly circling the bed.
GOETH
Do you have any idea how fond I am
of you?
(Helen doesn't dare
answer)
You can probably tell by the way I
look at you sometimes.
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
Circling, coming around Josef, Rebecca looks at him with pure
love.
89.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
Circling the table, the cabaret singer's eyes meet
Schindler's and smile mischievously.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Helen's downcast eyes follow Goeth's boots as he comes past
again, circling.
GOETH
It fills me with doubt, my fondness
for you. I look at you sometimes
and it makes me question all of
this.
His gesture includes the dank room, Plaszow, the war itself
and the Reich's policies of extermination.
GOETH
Why can't I touch you? What's wrong
with that? What would it feel like?
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
Josef's eyes track his bride as she circles past him again.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
The nightclub singer comes past Scherner and Toffel, her eyes
evaluating them, dismissing them, and circles around behind
their chairs.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
The arc of Goeth's path has narrowed; he's closer now as he
circles past Helen again.
GOETH
I know it's wrong. I know you're
not even a person in the strictest
sense of the word, but still -
(pause)
- in my heart - I have these
feelings.
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
Circling Josef the seventh time, Rebecca glances to one of
the women taking a light bulb from a bare socket.
90.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
The spotlight follows the singer as she circles around behind
Schindler, very near him.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Goeth's face, tortured with doubt, comes into and out of the
light of a lamp as he circles past it.
GOETH
What am I supposed to do with
these feelings of affection I have
for you?
He slows to consider her. His hand slowly reaches toward her.
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
The light bulb passes from hand to hand.
GOETH (V.O.)
What am I supposed to do?
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
The singer takes Schindler's hand in hers.
GOETH (V.O.)
Something has to happen.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Goeth's delicate hand, moving closer to Helen's face to
stroke it lovingly, hesitates just before it touches her
skin.
GOETH
I want you.
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
Josef's shoe comes down, crushing the light bulb.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Goeth's hand slams across Helen's face.
INT. NIGHTCLUB - CONTINUED
The singer slides onto Schindler's lap and kisses him on the
mouth to amused applause.
91.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Goeth is on top of Helen, beating her savagely.
INT. HUT 57 - CONTINUED
Josef takes his wife into his arms and kisses her.
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
The lamp crashes to the floor, pitching the room, and Goeth's
beating of the one he loves, into -
- DARKNESS
INT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
Schindler comes through his factory like a king among his
subjects handing out bottles of wine from cases carried by
boys too young, really, to be working here. In addition to
the mid-day soup and bread, bowls of fresh fruit have been
set out on the long work tables.
INT. UPSTAIRS OFFICES, D.E.F. - LATER - DAY
In honor of Schindler's birthday, Goeth has brought over
Stern and the Rosners - the musicians, at the moment,
accompanying the best baritone in the Ukrainian garrison.
Surrounded by his friends and lovers, Schindler cuts a cake.
He receives congratulations from the many SS men present and
the embraces, in turn, of Ingrid and Klonowska and Goeth.
From Stern he gets a handshake.
INT. FACTORY FLOOR - SAME TIME
At one of the tables, several workers are debating which of
them will go upstairs to thank Schindler.
INT. UPSTAIRS OFFICES - CONTINUED
A Jewish girl from the shop floor is admitted and timidly
approaches the drunken group around Schindler. The SS men
consider her as a curiosity; Schindler, as he would any
beautiful girl. The music breaks and out of the silence comes
a small nervous voice:
FACTORY GIRL
... On behalf of the workers...
sir... I wish for you a happy
birthday...
92.
(MORE)
She hesitates. She's surrounded by SS uniforms and swastikas
and holstered guns. Schindler smiles; this is a beautiful
girl.
SCHINDLER
Thank you.
He kisses her on the mouth, and the smiles on the faces
around them strain. Stern glances to heaven. Amon cocks his
head like a confused dog. The kiss is broken, finally, and
Schindler smiles again with impunity.
SCHINDLER
Thank them for me.
The girl backs away nodding anxiously; all she wants now is
out. Henry Rosner, nudging his brother, whispers -
HENRY ROSNER
Come on, before somebody shoots
her.
LEO ROSNER
(stunned)
Or him.
They begin another song, and the party struggles to resume.
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - DAY
His annual physical interrupted by bad news, Goeth, in his
undershirt, paces with a memorandum in his hand, frowning at
the others in the room - Leo John, Hujar, Goldberg, and one
of the camp physicians, Dr. Blancke.
GOETH
Why me? Why not one of the
seventeen hundred other camps in
this God-forsaken country? Why
can't they take them?
DR. BLANCKE
Not everyone in the camp is in good
health. We could determine who is
and who isn't and -
(Goeth peers up at heaven)
It doesn't have to be tedious.
GOETH
It's tedious. It's lists. It's
paperwork. I'm already suffocating
in paperwork in this fucking place
without -
93.
GOETH(CONT'D)
(Goldberg opens his mouth
to speak)
Yeah, I know, you like paperwork,
what do you know.
LEO JOHN
Maybe we could double-bunk the
prisoners again.
GOETH
I can't double-bunk them again ;t
According to Directive - I don know
- something -
GOLDBERG
Labor Memorandum 94-F, section -
GOETH
- I have to allow so many meters of
air per person -
GOLDBERG
- three cubic meters -
GOETH
- because of typhus. That's what we
need this summer. A typhus
epidemic.
DR. BLANCKE
You shouldn't get so excited, it's
bad for your heart -
GOETH
Hungary. Hungary. Why? Who cares
about Hungary? It's like invading
Poland again.
EXT. APPELLPLATZ - PLASZOW - PRE-DAWN
Were they not asleep in their barracks, the prisoners would
no doubt shudder at the sight: the clerks are setting up
their folding tables.
Other figures move around the parade ground in the murky dawn
light: these raising a banner, those wheeling filing cabinets
across the Appellplatz, this one wiring a phonograph, that
one saturating a pad with ink from a bottle.
Goldberg, Lord of Lists, moves from table to table handing
out carbons of lists and sharing morning pleasantries with
the clerks.
94.
Some men in white appear like ghosts. A doctor's kit is
opened, a stethoscope removed. Another cleans the lenses of
his glasses. Someone sharpens a pencil.
EXT. DEPOT - PLASZOW - PRE-DAWN
A trainman waving a lantern guides an engineer who's slowly
backing an empty cattle car along the tracks. It couples to
another empty slatted car with a harsh clank.
EXT. APPELLPLATZ - PLASZOW - MORNING
The needle of the phonograph is set down on a pocked 78. The
first scratchy notes of a Strauss waltz blare from the camp
speakers.
EXT. BALCONY - GOETH'S VILLA - MORNING
Shirtless, Goeth calmly smokes his first cigarette of the
morning as he listens to the music wafting up from down
below.
His mistress, Majola, steps out onto the balcony in her slip,
and peers down at the Appellplatz where the entire population
of the camp has been concentrated - some fifteen thousand
prisoners.
MAJOLA
What's going on?
GOETH
I've got a shipment of seven
thousand Hungarians coming in, I
have to make room.
(glancing down at the
prisoners)
It's always something.
EXT. APPELLPLATZ - PLASZOW - DAY
Though the music and banners struggle to evoke the atmosphere
of a country fair, the presence of the doctors belie it. A
sorting out process is going on here, the healthy from the
unhealthy.
A physician wipes at his brow with his handkerchief as
several prisoners run back and forth, naked, before him. He
makes his selections quickly: this one into this line, that
one into that, and Goldberg moves among them recording the
names.
95.
Other groups of people run naked in front of other doctors
and clerks. Notations are made and lines are formed. The sun
beats down and the music lies.
EXT. DEPOT - PLASZOW - DAY
Some still pulling their clothes back on, the first wave of
the "unfit" is marched onto the platform. A guard slides open
the gate of a cattle car and this first unlucky group climbs
aboard.
EXT. APPELLPLATZ - PLASZOW - DAY
Behind the camouflage of other women prisoners, Mila
Pfefferberg rubs a beet against her cheeks in desperate hope
of adding a little color to her skin. Another woman pricks
her finger and rubs the blood across her gray lips.
Amon Goeth, his shirtsleeves uncharacteristically rolled up,
chats with one of the doctors as another group strips.
Whether the topic is this Health Aktion or the unseasonable
weather is unclear, but he nods approvingly.
He steps away and watches, thoroughly bored, a group of men
taking off their clothes. His glance settles of Pfefferberg
whose shrug wonders, Do I really have to go through this?
Goeth turns to a clerk and points.
GOETH
My mechanic.
Pfefferberg is motioned away from the others; he's okay, he
doesn't have to be put through this indignity. He gestures to
the lines of women across the Appellplatz, and Goeth nods,
Yeah, okay, why not. To the clerk -
GOETH
His wife.
The clerk accompanies Pfefferberg and, making a notation on
the way, finds Mila.
EXT. DEPOT - PLASZOW - DAY
The sun is higher, the cattle cars hotter. Prisoners' arms
stretch out between the slats offering diamonds in exchange
for a sip of water.
EXT. PLASZOW - LATER - DAY
The needle of the phonograph is set down on another record, a
children's song, "Mammi, Kauf mir ein Pferdchen" (Mommy, Buy
me a Pony).
96.
Children are yanked from the arms of their parents. Wailing
protests quickly escalate to brawls with the guards.
Revolvers and rifles aim at the sun and fire. Music, shots,
wails.
INT. BARRACKS - SAME TIME - DAY
Guards traipse through a deserted barracks peering up at the
rafters, pulling planks from the floor, upending cots,
looking for more children.
EXT. BARRACKS - SAME TIME - DAY
A small figure in red sprints across to another barracks,
counts to herself five boards in from a corner and wrenches
off the sixth - revealing several kids, sardine-tight in a
cavity.
She runs across to another barracks and, just inside the
door, counts with her bare feet seven planks from it and
pulls at the eighth - finding two more kids filling a small
hole.
She hurries out past a crude structure, glimpses guards
coming around the corner of a barracks, turns back and throws
open the door of the -
INT. WOMEN'S LATRINES
Holding a hand out to either side, Genia lowers herself into
a pit into which women have defecated. She works her way
slowly down, trying to find knee- and toe-holds in the foul
walls, ignores the flies invading her ears, her nostrils.
Reaching the surface of the muck she lets her feet submerge,
then her ankles, her shins, her knees, before finally
touching harder ground. As she struggles to slow her
breathing, her racing heart, she hears a hallucinatory hiss -
VOICE
This is our place.
She sees eyes in the darkness; five other children are
already there.
EXT. DEPOT - PLASZOW - LATER - DAY
Waves of heat rise from the roofs of the long string of
cattle cars. Inside, those who "failed" the medical exams
bake as they wait for the last cars to be filled.
Schindler's Mercedes pulls up. He climbs out and stares
transfixed. 
97.
He notices Goeth then, standing with the other
industrialists, Bosch and Madritsch, and strolls over to
them.
GOETH
I tried to call you, I'm running a
little late, this is taking longer
than I thought. Have a drink.
There's a makeshift bar on a mahogany table, stocked with
liquor and a pitcher of iced tea. Goeth glances away to the
train. The idling engine only partially covers the desperate
pleas for water coming from inside the slatted cars.
GOETH
They're complaining now? They don't
know what complaining is.
He shakes his head, amused. Schindler watches as another car
is loaded. It's like they're climbing into an oven.
SCHINDLER
What do you say we get your fire
brigade out here and hose down the
cars?
Goeth stares at him blankly, then with a What-will-you-thinkof-next?
kind of look, then laughs uproariously and calls
over to Hujar -
GOETH
Bring the fire trucks!
HUJAR
What?
Hujar heard him, he just doesn't get it. Finally he turns to
another guy and tells him to do it.
STREAMS OF WATER CASCADE
onto the scalding rooftops. The fire trucks are there, the
hoses firing the cold water at the cars and on the people
inside who are roaring their gratitude.
GOETH
This is really cruel, Oskar, you're
giving them hope. You shouldn't do
that. That's cruel.
And amusing, not just to Goeth, but to the other SS officers
standing around as well. Oskar moves away to talk with one of
the firemen. 
98.
At full extension, apparently, the hoses still only reach
halfway down the long line of cars. He returns to Goeth.
SCHINDLER
I've got some 200-meter hoses back
at Emalia, we can reach the cars
down at the end.
Goeth finds this especially sidesplitting, and hollers -
GOETH
Hujar!
THE D.E.F. HOSES
Have arrived and are being coupled to Plaszow's. As the water
drenches the cars further back, the people inside loudly
voice their thanks, and the guards and officers outside grin
at the spectacle.
GUARD
What does he think he's saving them
from?
The joke takes on new dimensions when, from the back of the
D.E.F. truck, boxes of food are unloaded. Accompanied by the
laughter of the SS - and watched by Stern from the end of the
platform - Schindler moves along the string of cars pushing
bread through the slats.
GOETH
Oh, my God.
Goeth is almost hysterical. But slowly then, slowly, the
amusement on his face fades. His friend moving along the cars
bringing futile mercy to the doomed in front of countless SS
men, laughing or not, is not just behaving recklessly here,
it's as though he were possessed.
The water rains down on the last car.
EXT. D.E.F. - DAY
A German staff car pulls in across the factory gate, blocking
it. Two Gestapo men climb out.
INT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
The girl who brought Schindler best wishes on his birthday
glances up from her work to the Gestapo crossing through the
factory. They climb the stairs to the upstairs offices and,
moments later, appear behind Schindler's wall of glass.
99.
INT. SCHINDLER'S OFFICE - DAY
Schindler leaning against his desk, drink in his hand, calmly
tries to assess his humorless arresters.
SCHINDLER
I'm not saying you'll regret it,
but you might. I want you to be
aware of that.
GESTAPO 1
We'll risk it.
Schindler glances beyond them to a point outside his office,
to Klonowska. She nods, she knows what to do, she'll make the
phone calls, call in the favors.
SCHINDLER
All right, sure, it's a nice day,
I'll go for a drive with you.
He snuffs out his cigarette.
INT. GESTAPO CAR - MOVING - DAY
Settled comfortably in the back seat, Schindler glances idly
out the window. Taking the same route as the last time he was
arrested, the car approaches SS Headquarters on Pomorska
Street... then passes it.
Schindler glances back at the receding building like at a
friend leaving on a train, and tries to keep his concern out
of his voice -
SCHINDLER
Where're we going?
The men up front don't answer. The car turns onto Kolejowa
and approaches a building a block long with an ominous
sameness to the windows.
INT. MONTELUPICH PRISON - CRACOW - DAY
Schindler is made to empty his pockets, his money,
cigarettes, everything. Around him clerks speak in whispers,
as if raised voices might set off head-splitting echoes along
the narrow monotonous corridors.
INT. MONTELUPICH PRISON - DAY
He's led down a flight of stairs into a claustrophobic
tunnel. He's taken past darkened cells, past shadowy figures
crouched in corners and on the floor.
100.
(MORE)
INT. CELL, MONTELUPICH PRISON - DAY
A water bucket. A waste bucket. No windows. This is not a
cell for dignitaries; this arrest is different.
Schindler, incongruous with the dank surroundings in his
double-breasted suit, slowly paces back and forth before his
cellmate, a soldier who looks like he's been here forever,
his greatcoat pulled up around his ears for warmth.
SCHINDLER
I violated the Race and
Resettlement Act. Though I doubt
they can point out the actual
provision to me.
(pause)
I kissed a Jewish girl.
Schindler forces a smile. His cellmate just stares. Now
there's a crime; much more impressive, much more serious,
than his own.
INT. OFFICE - MONTELUPICH PRISON - DAY
In a stiff-backed chair sits a very unlikely defender of
racial improprieties - Amon Goeth. To an impassive SS colonel
behind a desk, Goeth tries to highlight extenuating
circumstances:
GOETH
He likes women. He likes goodlooking
women. He sees a goodlooking
woman, he doesn't think. He
has so many women. They love him.
He's married, he's got all these
women. All right, she was Jewish,
he shouldn't have done it. But you
didn't see this girl. I saw this
girl. This girl was very goodlooking.
Goeth tries to read the man behind the desk, but his face is
like a wall.
GOETH
They cast a spell on you, you know,
the Jews. You work closely with
them like I do, you see this. They
have this power, it's like a virus.
Some of my men are infected with
this virus. They should be pitied,
not punished. They should receive
treatment, because this is as real 
101.
GOETH(CONT'D)
as typhus. I see this all the time.
Goeth shifts in his chair; He knows he's not getting anywhere
with this man. He switches tacks:
GOETH
It's a matter of money? We can
discuss that. That'd be all right
with me.
In the silence that follows, Goeth realizes he has made a
serious error in judgement. This man sitting soberly before
him is one of that rare breed - the unbribable official.
SS COLONEL
You're offering me a bribe?
GOETH
A "bribe?" No, no, please, come
on... a gratuity.
Suddenly the man stands up and salutes, which thoroughly
confuses Goeth since Goeth is his inferior in rank. But he
isn't saluting Goeth, he's saluting the officer who has just
stepped into the room behind him.
SCHERNER
Sit down.
The colonel sits back down. Scherner pulls up a chair next to
Goeth.
SCHERNER
Hello, Amon.
GOETH
Sir.
Scherner smiles and allows Goeth to shake his hand, but it's
clear, even to Goeth himself, that he has fallen from grace.
INT. GOETH'S VILLA - PLASZOW - NIGHT
A tall, thin, gray Waffen SS officer has a request for the
Rosner brothers.
SS OFFICER
I want to hear "Gloomy Sunday"
again.
He's drunk, morose; it seems unlikely he'll be on his feet
much longer. 
102.
(MORE)
Indeed, as Henry and Leo Rosner begin the song - that
excessively melancholy tale in which a young man commits
suicide for love - the field officer staggers over to a chair
in the corner of the crowded room and slumps into it.
SCHERNER
We give you Jewish girls at five
marks a day, Oskar, you should kiss
us, not them.
Goeth laughs too loud, drawing a weary glance from Scherner.
Schindler smiles good-naturedly. He's out of jail, a little
worse for wear perhaps, a little more subdued than usual.
SCHERNER
God forbid you ever get a real
taste for Jewish skirt - there's no
future in it. No future. They don't
have a future. And that's not just
good old-fashioned Jew-hating talk.
It's policy now.
Behind them, Helen can be glimpsed running up and down the
staircase in a ritual of public humiliation for some domestic
infraction.
THE THIN GRAY SS OFFICER
He is back in front of the musicians, swaying precariously, a
drink in his hand -
SS OFFICER
"Gloomy Sunday" again.
Again they play the song. Again he staggers across the
crowded room to his chair in the corner, paying no attention
to the visiting commandant from Treblinka, or anybody else -
TREBLINKA GUY
- We can process at Treblinka, if
everything is working? I don't
know, maybe two thousand units a
day.
He shrugs like it's nothing, or with modesty, it's unclear.
Goeth is duly impressed; Schindler, only politely so. Helen
is still running up and down the stairs in the background.
TREBLINKA GUY
Now Auschwitz. Now you're talking.
What I've got is nothing - it's
like - like a - machine. Auschwitz,
though, now there's a death
factory. There, they know how to do 
103.
TREBLINKA GUY(CONT'D)
it. There, they know what they're
doing.
AGAIN THE GRAY OFFICER
wavering before Henry and Leo. This time they don't wait for
him to ask for it -
LEO ROSNER
"Gloomy Sunday."
The man nods and stumbles away and Henry's bow touches the
strings of his violin. As the man slowly wanders out to the
balcony, Henry not only plays the sad melody again, he plays
with it, and this one somber man alone in the night air.
HENRY ROSNER
God, if I have the power, maybe
he'll kill himself.
An unearthly conviction takes hold of Henry and guides his
bow. He wrenches from the song all the sentimentality he can,
pushing the man with unhappy memories of an affair closer to
the brink. His brother glances over his accordion to him
concerned.
LEO ROSNER
It's obvious what you're doing,
Henry, stop it.
But Henry doesn't stop. He declares war with song, filling it
with more and more emotion with each stroke of the bow. No
one else in the room appears aware of the exchange going on
between this man on the balcony and this music - certainly
not Helen who is still running up and down the stairs - but
Leo is nervous.
LEO ROSNER
Somebody's going to notice. Don't
do it. Play it... worse.
Leo smiles tightly to the crowd he imagines suspects what's
happening, trying to look benevolent. Henry's eyes glide from
the neck of his violin to the officer out on the balcony.
Through his clenched teeth, Leo hisses -
LEO ROSNER
Henry -
Goeth has glanced over, staring at the musicians, but Henry
doesn't dampen the spirit of his invocation; in fact, he lays
it on thicker, pours more emotion into the song, until -
104.
A muffled shot, like a coda, ends the song. Goeth and his
guests turn in time to see the silhouetted figure out on the
balcony crumple against the railing with a bullet in his head
and slump onto the floor.
Goeth glances back to the musicians, stunned. The brothers'
faces are studies of utter unsophistication. Funereal silence
fills the room. A perfectly good party has been ruined.
HENRY ROSNER
Something else, sir. Strauss,
maybe. Brahms.
Goeth hasn't a clue what has happened. In fact, now that the
man on the balcony is dead, only two remain in the room who
do. Goeth finally finds his voice -
GOETH
No. Nothing else.
Tight on the accordion as it goes into its case with a
wheeze, and the violin as it slides into its with a hollow
clunk. The lids come down and the latches snap shut. Done.
EXT. PARK, STRASZEWSKIEGO STREET - DAY
A lone pigeon perched on the edge of a small stone fountain
cocks its head at the sight of a long arrow of birds wedging
across the sky as if from an impending storm.
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - DAY
A neat stack of mail in Helen's hand. She comes through the
threshold of the study with it and places it on the desk
where Goeth sits enduring the drudgery of initialing
paperwork.
EXT. PARK - CONTINUED - DAY
The pigeon takes flight, arcing up past some little German
children - the sons and daughters of SS officers residing in
the fashionable apartments lining the street - who suspend
their games to peer into the sky at the first snowflakes of
winter floating gently down.
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - CONTINUED - DAY
Goeth slits an envelope addressed to him in feminine script.
Reading the letter inside, reminiscences, perhaps, of some
enchanted evening, his eyes smile.
105.
He finishes and sets it aside, picks up the next envelope -
official SS correspondence with a Berlin postmark - and opens
it with much less enthusiasm.
Reading the two-page memo inside labeled "O.K.H." (Subtitle:
Army High Command) his boredom is soon replaced by
incredulity, then seething anger, then incredulity again, and
finally, as he glances to the window beyond which his kingdom
lies, concern.
EXT. PARK - CONTINUED - DAY
The children run past Klonowska's poodle, tethered to the
leash held in its mistress's hand. She's staring up at the
sky, too, like the children, at the fine flakes of snow
floating down.
INT. ROOM - PLASZOW - DAY
So close are the mechanisms of the gun, it's impossible to
determine precisely what place this is. A manicured hand with
fingers like a pianist's comes up with a nail file in it and
rasps at the firing pin while a voice hums Madam Butterfly.
EXT. BALCONY, SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - DAY
Schindler steps out onto his balcony and waves to Klonowska
across the street in the park with the dog. He glances to the
sky at the snow, puzzled, perhaps, by its unseasonable
appearance.
He holds out his hand to catch some. Rubs it between his
fingers. It's not cold. It's warm and dry. He reaches to the
railing where more of the flakes have accumulated and runs a
finger along the metal. It seems to be ash.
INT. SHED - PLASZOW - DAY
Alone in a shed, Chilowicz paces nervously past building
materials and trucks. The door opens, splashing light over
the silhouette of a Ukrainian guard coming in, and Chilowicz
glances to him anxiously.
The guard pulls a gun from his waistband... and hands it to
the Jewish gangster. Chilowicz hands back in return fistful
of diamonds and climbs into the wood furnace of fuel-burning
truck.
EXT. CRACOW - DAY
Driving through Cracow toward his factory, anxious to reach
it, Schindler uses the wipers to clear the falling ash from
his windshield. 
106.
(MORE)
On street corners and from windows, people stare off in the
direction of Plaszow, where the mysterious cloud of debris
seems to be emanating.
EXT. PLASZOW - DAY
The truck rolls toward the main gate of the camp. Someone
steps out from the gatehouse and signals with an upraised
hand for the driver to stop. The hand is finely manicured and
belongs to Goeth.
The Ukrainian guard climbs down from the driver's seat and
lumbers behind the Commandant to the rear of the truck. They
exchange half-smiles as Goeth climbs onto the bed. He pulls
open the furnace door and mimes surprise over his discovery
of the man in the hole.
GOETH
Wilek. I was just thinking about
you. What on earth are you doing
down in there?
EXT. D.E.F. - DAY
Carrying blankets and bundles, Schindler's workers are
marched under heavy guard out of the factory and its annexes
and across the fortified yard. The Mercedes pulls up,
Schindler jumps out, crosses to an SS officer and angrily
demands -
SCHINDLER
What is going on?
SS OFFICER
Orders.
The officer hands Schindler papers, orders of some kind. The
irate industrialist scans them, throws them to the ground,
and strides back to his car. It's covered with ash.
GOETH (V.O.)
I was imagining you at Auschwitz...
EXT. MAIN GATE - PLASZOW - DAY
Out of the furnace, at least for the moment, Chilowicz stands
with Goeth on the bed of the truck. His manner is so
pleasant, Goeth's, that Chilowicz can almost allow himself
the delusion he's not about to die.
GOETH
... finding yourself standing in
the wrong line, searching your mind
for something you could bargain 
107.
GOETH(CONT'D)
(MORE)
with in order to be moved to the
right line. But you'd already spent
all your money. Your diamonds. On a
coat, some shoes, a second helping
of soup, a cigarette. You had
nothing left. Nothing to trade
except - oh - information... about
me.
Chilowicz glances from Goeth to the Ukrainian traitor at the
back of the truck. If he's quick enough, he might be able to
get them both. There's no one else around to worry about.
They're all up on the hill, by the fires.
The gangster pulls out his gun and fires at Goeth, sweeps it
around to shoot the guard ... realizes he didn't hear the
first shot. He swings it back again to gun down his primary
target, Goeth, standing before him completely at ease, but
again there's only a click.
GOETH
I've had the same problem. It's
infuriating.
Goeth raises his revolver and shoots Chilowicz through the
neck.
EXT. FOREST - PLASZOW - DAY
The fires rage on the hill. The ash wafts up into the sky.
Suddenly the roar of the flames is eclipsed by -
The trickle of water in a creek flowing gently under an
umbrella of trees. Leo John and his five year old son, on
their knees catching tadpoles, seem unaware of, or at least
not distracted by, the ghastly endeavor going on behind them -
The roaring inferno consumes the victims of the ghetto
massacre, the victims of Plaszow, the thousands exhumed from
the earth out of mass graves in the forest and piled like
bricks and board, layer upon layer, building materials for
the huge raging pyres.
Arriving in his car, Schindler sees Goeth standing up at the
tree line, like Satan against the wall of flames. Climbing
the hill, furious, Schindler calls up -
SCHINDLER
You took my workers.
GOETH
(calling down, indignant)
They're taking mine. When Scherner
said they didn't have a future, I 
108.
GOETH(CONT'D)
(MORE)
didn't think he meant tomorrow.
Schindler slows; he's seen a wheelbarrow trundled by
Pfefferberg, a corpse in it, and fears the body is Mila's.
But then sees her trundling another barrow, another corpse in
it. Goeth yells down -
GOETH
Can you believe this? I don't have
enough to do, they come up with
this? I have to find every body
buried up here? And burn it?
He shrugs, It's always something. Schindler reaches the top
of the hill and stares at the burning pyramids being stoked
by masked and gagging workers, and at Hujar running around,
having lost his mind, firing at the corpses as they're given
temporary life by the flames, sitting forward, their limbs
reaching, their mouths screaming.
GOETH
The party's over, Oskar, they're
closing us down, taking everybody
to Auschwitz.
SCHINDLER
When?
GOETH
I don't know. As soon as I can
arrange the shipments. That ought
to be fun.
He sighs at the task, at the unfairness of it all, the
dissolution of his kingdom. His glance finds his man, Leo
John, over at the stream.
GOETH
This is good. I'm out of business
and he's catching tadpoles with his
son.
Tight on the gleeful boy with a tadpole in his hand. Behind
him, the ash from the pyres rises high into the sky, blotting
out the sun.
INT. STERN'S OFFICE, PLASZOW - DAY
Schindler comes in, finds Stern behind his desk shuffling
papers. He sits, pours a drink from his flask and offers it
perfunctorily to the accountant, knowing, of course, he'll
decline.
SCHINDLER
109.
I've been talking to Goeth -
STERN
I know the destination, these are
the evacuation orders. I'm to help
organize the shipments and put
myself on the last train -
SCHINDLER
That's not what I was going to say.
Schindler waits for the accountant to stop shuffling the
papers on his desk and give him his attention. Stern finally
glances up from his work.
SCHINDLER
I made Goeth promise me he'll put
in a good word for you.
(pause)
Nothing bad's going to happen to
you there, you'll receive special
treatment.
Schindler's reassurances fail to undo the resignation Stern
feels regarding his and the other Plaszow prisoners' fates.
STERN
The directives coming in from
Berlin mention "Special Treatment"
more and more often. I'd like to
think that's not what you mean.
SCHINDLER
Preferential treatment. All right?
Do we have to invent a whole new
language?
STERN
I think so.
Schindler sighs. He hates all this every bit as much as
Stern. Almost as much, anyway.
STERN
You're staying, I take it.
SCHINDLER
In Cracow? What for?
STERN
"What for," you have a business to
run.
110.
Schindler gives a cavalier wave at the air; the business of
business seems to hold no more allure for him.
STERN
You'll have to hire new workers.
Poles I guess. They cost a little
more, but what're you going to do?
Schindler smiles faintly, remembering the time Stern
explained to him the cost benefits of hiring Jews over Poles.
SCHINDLER
You ran my business.
Stern shrugs. Schindler nurses his drink.
SCHINDLER
No, I'm going home. I've done what
I came here for. I've got more
money than any man can spend in a
lifetime.
He downs the rest of his drink and pours another. They
consider each other.
SCHINDLER
Someday this is all going to end
you know.
The war. They both nod, but it's hard right now for either to
believe it, or that they will both survive it.
SCHINDLER
I was going to say we'll have a
drink then.
His shrug adds, But you never accept. Stern reaches out his
hand. Schindler stares at him confused, then gestures to the
drink, This?
STERN
I think I'd better have it now.
Schindler hands it to him. The accountant raises the glass
slightly in acknowledgement of Schindler, or in resignation,
and drinks.
INT. SCHINDLER'S APARTMENT - DAY
Schindler sitting alone in his elegant apartment smoking a
cigarette. Eventually he snuffs it out in an ashtray and gets
up, grasping the handles of two suitcases.
111.
As he walks toward the door, all the furniture disappears,
leaving the place completely bare, with light pouring in
through the windows.
INT. D.E.F. FACTORY - DAY
A gauge at zero. Silent machines. The wall of glass
overlooking the deserted factory floor.
EXT. POLAND/CZECHOSLOVAKIA BORDER - EVENING
Schindler's Mercedes at a border crossing, the backseat piled
high with suitcases.
BORDER GUARD
Thank you, sir. Welcome home.
The border guard returns Schindler's passport to him and
lifts the barrier, and the Mercedes crosses onto Czech soil.
EXT. SQUARE, BRINNLITZ, CZECHOSLOVAKIA - MORNING
A church in the main square of a sleepy hamlet. A priest and
his parishioners, including Emilie Schindler, emerging from
it, morning Mass over.
Across the square, a porter pulls Schindler's steamer trunks
and suitcases from his Mercedes parked outside the town's
only hotel.
SCHINDLER
Wait.
He's noticed his wife; and she, him. But neither makes a move
toward the other. Finally she walks away, which Schindler
correctly interprets to mean, Yes, check into the hotel. To
the porter again -
SCHINDLER
Okay.
He gestures to the man to take the things into the hotel and
tips him extravagantly.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - DAY
Schindler's Mercedes climbs a private tree-lined road that
leads to a centuries-old estate perched alone and regally on
a mountain top.
112.
INT./EXT. HILLTOP ESTATE - DAY
Schindler wanders through empty baronial rooms to a large
balcony. From there he considers the view: the sky, rolling
vine-covered hills, the cottages of the village of Brinnlitz
lying far below like subjects kneeling before the monarch.
CARETAKER
There's no one here, sir.
Schindler turns to find the estate's caretaker framed under a
baroque arch, watching him.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, I know. Not for a hundred
years.
The caretaker nods hesitantly. Schindler turns away, back to
the view.
SCHINDLER
I'm thinking of buying it.
INT. BAR - BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
Except for the clothes of the working class clientele, the
scene is reminiscent of the SS nightclub in Cracow:
Schindler, the great entertainer, working his way around the
tables making sure everybody's got enough to drink, making
sure everybody's happy. A guy at a table with a girl gestures
him over.
BRINNLITZ MAN
So what's the story, Oskar, you do
all right over there - where the
hell was it - Warsaw?
SCHINDLER
Cracow, yeah, things worked out.
Things worked out. What're you
drinking?
(he glances around for the
barman)
How do you do?
He offers the girl his hand; she takes hold of it briefly,
politely. To her -
BRINNLITZ MAN
This man's always got something
going. Always something. But it
never quite works out, does it,
Oskar.
113.
SCHINDLER
This time was different.
His manner is modest, but the Brinnlitz local smiles slyly.
He knows Oskar well; always the hustler.
BRINNLITZ MAN
Now you're back.
SCHINDLER
Now I'm back.
BRINNLITZ MAN
So now what?
SCHINDLER
I don't know, I never have to work
again. What do people like that do?
(he shrugs)
I know. I'm going to have a good
time. And so are you.
He spots the barman and gestures to him to refill his
friend's and his date's drinks, pats the guy on the shoulder
and wanders over to another table. Watching after him -
GIRL
What business is he in?
The man has to think; not because he doesn't know, of course,
but because his old friend Oskar has been into so many things
it's hard to know which one to name. Finally -
BRINNLITZ MAN
The "Oskar Schindler" business.
INT. HOTEL ROOM - BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
A woman asleep in the bed. The one from the bar. In his robe,
at the window, Schindler calmly smokes as he stares out at
the night.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - DAWN
The town, off in the distance, nestled against the mountains.
The sun, just coming up. Closer, here, ramshackle structures,
a long abandoned factory of some kind.
Schindler, in leather riding gear, climbs down off an old DKW
racing motorcycle. He slowly wanders around, peers in through
broken windows, wanders around some more.
114.
(MORE)
He glances off into the distance. To the mansion perched on
the mountain top. Then back down here at all the junk lying
around the abandoned industrial buildings.
Tight on his face, torn between conflicting choices, or
realizing there's no choice, or only one choice, and hating
it.
SCHINDLER
Goddamn it.
EXT. BALCONY, GOETH'S VILLA - PLASZOW - DAY
Schindler and Goeth on the balcony of the villa, drinking.
GOETH
You want these people -
SCHINDLER
These people, my people, I want my
people.
Goeth considers his friend, greatly puzzled. Below them lies
the camp, still operating, at least for now, until the
shipment arrangements can be finalized.
GOETH
Who are you, Moses? What is this?
Where's the money in this? Where's
the scam?
SCHINDLER
It's good business.
GOETH
Oh, this is "good business" in your
opinion. You've got to move them,
the equipment, everything to
Czechoslovakia, pay for all that.
And build another camp? It doesn't
make any sense.
SCHINDLER
Look -
GOETH
You're not telling me something.
SCHINDLER
It's good for me - I know them, I'm
familiar with them, I don't have to
train them. It's good for you -
I'll compensate you. It's good for 
115.
SCHINDLER(CONT'D)
the Army - you know what I'm going
to make? Artillery shells. Tank
shells. They need that. Everybody's
happy.
GOETH
Yeah, sure.
Goeth finds this whole line of reasoning impossible to
believe. He's sure Schindler's got something else going here
he's not telling him.
GOETH
You're probably scamming me
somehow. If I'm making a hundred,
you got to be making three.
(Schindler admits it with
a shrug)
If you admit to making three, then
it's four, actually. But how?
SCHINDLER
I just told you.
GOETH
You did, but you didn't.
Goeth studies him, searching for the real answer in his face.
He can't find it.
GOETH
Yeah, all right, don't tell me,
I'll go along with it, it's just
irritating I can't figure it out.
SCHINDLER
All you have to do is tell me what
it's worth to you. What a person's
worth to you.
Goeth thinks about it in a silence. Then slowly nods to
himself. He's going to make some money out of this even if he
can't figure it out. He smiles.
GOETH
What's one worth to you?
That's the question.
HARD CUT TO:
INT. ADMINISTRATION BUILDING - STEVENS OFFICE - NIGHT
THE KEYS OF A TYPEWRITER slapping a name onto a list - 
116.
L E V A R T O V - the letters the size of buildings, the
sound as loud as gunshots -
TIGHT ON THE FACE OF A MAN - Rabbi Levartov - the hinge-maker
Goeth tried to kill with a faulty revolver -
THE KEYS HAMMER another name - P E R L M A N -
TIGHT ON TWO ELDERLY FACES - a man, a woman - the parents of
"Elsa Krause."
IN HIS SMALL CLUTTERED PLASZOW OFFICE - Stern transcribes
D.E.F. workers' names from a Reich Labor office document to
the list in his typewriter, Schindler's List.
THE KEYS RAP - W U L K E N - the FACE of the jeweler -
S C H I N D E L - the FACE of Genia's uncle -
TIGHT ON SCHINDLER slowly pacing the six or seven steps
Stern's cramped office allows, nursing a drink.
SCHINDLER
Poldek Pfefferberg... Mila
Pfefferberg...
THE KEYS typing P F E F F E -
PFEFFERBERG'S face, tight. MILA'S face, tight.
CURRENCY, hard Reichmarks, in a small valise. As Goeth looks
at it, he mumbles to himself -
GOETH
A virus...
MOVING DOWN THE LIST of names, forty, fifty. The sound of the
keys. Stern pulls the sheet out of the machine, rolls in
another, types a name.
HUNDREDS OF SEWING MACHINES stitching uniforms on the floor
of Madritsch's Plaszow factory.
SCHINDLER
You can do the same thing I'm
doing. You might even make money at
it.
MADRITSCH
I don't know...
THE KEYS typing another name - D R E S N E R
A FACE, Mrs. Dresner, FACE, Mr. Dresner, FACE, Danka -
117.
COGNAC SPILLING into a glass. The glass coming up to
Schindler's mouth, hesitating there.
SCHINDLER
The investors.
A NAME - A FACE - one of the original D.E.F. investors.
ANOTHER NAME - ANOTHER FACE - another of the Jewish
investors.
SCHINDLER
All of them. Szerwitz, his family.
STERN GLANCES UP with a look that asks Schindler if he's sure
about this one. He is. The keys type S Z E R W I T Z -
TIGHT ON THE FACE of the investor who stole from Schindler,
the one he threatened to have him killed by the SS, and the
faces of his sons -
THREE OR FOUR PAGES of names next to the typewriter. Stern,
trying to count them, estimates -
STERN
Four hundred, four fifty -
SCHINDLER
More.
THE TRUNK OF SCHINDLER'S MERCEDES yawning open. He takes a
small valise from it and heads for Goeth's villa.
THE KEYS typing R O S N E R -
TIGHT ON Henry Rosner, the violinist. TIGHT ON his brother
Leo, the accordionist.
SCHINDLER WITH MADRITSCH again -
SCHINDLER
Come on, I know about the extra
food you give them - the clothes -
paid for out of your own pocket.
MADRITSCH
I don't know...
MOVING DOWN another page of names.
STERN (O.S.)
About six hundred -
118.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER (O.S.)
More.
THE SOUND OF THE KEYS OVER the face of a boy, the "chicken
thief." Over THE FACE OF THE MECHANIC who ruined Goeth's car.
Over FACES we've never seen.
STERN (O.S.)
Eight hundred, give or take.
SCHINDLER
(angrily)
Give or take what, Stern - how many
- count them.
ACROSS FROM A NAME on Plaszow's books, the word SCHNEIDERIN
(Subtitle: SEAMSTRESS). In the typewriter, opposite the same
name, Stern types METALLARBEITERIN (Subtitle: METAL WORKER).
ANOTHER NAME on Plaszow's books and, opposite it, the word
SCHUSTER (Subtitle: SHOEMAKER). Across from the same name in
the typewriter, Stern types SCHWIESER (Subtitle: WELDER).
MADRITSCH turns away shaking his head 'no' to Schindler's
appeal to him to make his own list, to get his workers out.
SCHINDLER
Come on -
MADRITSCH
I've done enough for the Jews. I'm
taking a vacation.
INT. STERN'S OFFICE - PLASZOW - NIGHT
To the faint tapping of the typewriter keys across the room,
Schindler runs his finger down several pages of names,
counting to himself. Eventually, quietly -
SCHINDLER
That's it.
Stern heard him and stops typing, glances over.
SCHINDLER
You can finish that page.
Stern resumes where he left off, but then hesitates. Glances
over again. There's something he doesn't understand.
STERN
What did Goeth say about this? You
just told him how many people you 
119.
STERN(CONT'D)
needed, and he - ?
He trails off. It doesn't sound right. And Schindler doesn't
answer. He's avoided telling Stern the details of the deal
struck with Goeth, and balks telling him now.
STERN
You're not buying them.
(no answer)
You're buying them? You're paying
him for each of these names?
SCHINDLER
If you were still working for me
I'd expect you to talk me out of
it, it's costing me a fortune.
Stern had no idea. And has no idea now what to say. He's
astonished by what this man is doing. Schindler shrugs like
it's no big deal, but Stern knows it is. Silence. Then -
SCHINDLER
Finish the page and leave one space
at the bottom.
Stern turns back, does as he's told. Schindler drinks.
Nothing but the sound of the typewriter keys. And then
nothing at all. The page is done. The rest will die.
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - NIGHT
Calmly nursing a cognac, Schindler watches Goeth leafing
through the completed list of names. They number 1,076 - 780
men and 296 women - and fill ten legal-sized pages of white
paper. On the last sheet, at the bottom, Goeth notices a
blank line across from the number 1,077 and, tapping at it -
GOETH
There's a clerical error here at
the bottom of the last -
SCHINDLER
No, there's one more name I want to
put there.
INT. CELLAR - SAME TIME
Helen kneels before the bed in her grave-like room and bows
her head to pray for the deliverance she knows will never
come.
120.
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - CONTINUED
Goeth's eyes come up from the list at Schindler's (offscreen)
mention of the name he wants to add.
SCHINDLER
I'll never find a maid as welltrained
as her in Brinnlitz.
They're all country girls.
GOETH
No.
He imbues the two letters with such finality of tone that it
seems pointless to argue. And Schindler doesn't. Instead, he
produces from a pocket a deck of cards and sets it on the
coffee table in front of him.
SCHINDLER
One hand of Vingt-et-un. If you
win, I pay you 7,400 zloty. Hit a
natural, I make it 14,800. If I
win, you give me the girl.
Goeth has to laugh. The proposal strikes him as ludicrous.
GOETH
I can't wager Helen in a card game.
SCHINDLER
Why not?
GOETH
It wouldn't be - right.
SCHINDLER
She's just going to Auschwitz
anyway, what difference does it
make?
GOETH
She's not going to Auschwitz. I'd
never do that to her. What kind of
a monster do you think I am?
Goeth seems genuinely hurt that Schindler would think him
capable of anything so fiendish.
GOETH
I want to take her back to Germany
with me. I want her to come work
for me there. I want to grow old
with her.
121.
SCHINDLER
Are you mad, you can't take her to
Germany with -
GOETH
Of course I can't. That's what I'd
like to do. What I can do, if I'm
any sort of a man, is the next most
merciful thing. Take her into the
woods and shoot her painlessly in
the head.
Without any hint of sarcasm, Goeth shrugs, Right? Schindler
just stares. Then, eventually, manages a nod. He reaches for
the cards, gathers them in his hand, and is returning them to
his pocket when -
GOETH
How much did you say for natural
21? Fourteen thousand, eight
hundred?
HARD CUT TO:
THE CARDS PURRING in Goeth's hands. He's not about to risk
being cheated out of the mercy killing by any sleight-of-hand
abilities Schindler may possess - it's bad enough he's
gambling with Helen's fate at all - and shuffles the cards
himself. He does allow Schindler to cut the deck - he's not
completely paranoid - takes it back and deals.
Schindler finds his face-down cards spotted with eight clubs
and five diamonds. He scuffs them against the table, calling
for a hit, and is skimmed another five. That's 18. Not bad.
Particularly since atop Goeth's hole card, like an awkward
puzzle piece, lies a five of spades.
Insanely, though, Schindler scrapes the table for a fourth
card and Goeth flips him an ace of hearts. Schindler displays
his cards - 19 altogether - and Goeth stares at them, then at
Schindler, in disbelief.
GOETH
You hit on 18? Playing for a woman,
you hit on 18? That's not even
gambling, that's sick.
Goeth keeps staring, unsettled by the absurdity of the move,
worried, perhaps, that providence sits on Schindler's
shoulder like an angel. He turns over his hole card then - a
3 - and lays it alongside his 5. He deals himself a 4 -
that's 12 altogether now - and he can almost hear the
explosion from the gun against the back of Helen's head. 
122.
He smiles confidently, thumbs at the top of the deck, and
throws down a -
INT. CELLAR - CONTINUED
Helen's head lifts up to the muffled wail of pain issuing
from somewhere above her ceiling -
INT. GOETH'S STUDY - CONTINUED
A king of hearts stares up blankly from the table. Goeth's
four cards total 22.
SHOCK CUT TO:
The letters - H I R S C H, H E L E N - as typewriter keys
slam them opposite the number 1077 at the bottom of the tenth
page of Schindler's List.
INT. TOWN COUNCIL HALL - BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
Schindler in front of a large assembly, party pin in his
lapel, as usual, imposing SS guards on either side of him.
SCHINDLER
This is my home.
He looks out over his audience, the citizens of Brinnlitz,
local government officials, many of them appearing bewildered
by him or the "situation" that has arisen.
SCHINDLER
I was born here, my wife was born
here, my mother is buried here,
this is my home.
His estranged wife is there. So are the guys he was drinking
with.
SCHINDLER
Do you really think I'd bring a
thousand Jewish criminals into my
home?
Everyone seems to breathe sighs of relief as if they've been
waiting for him to say this, to dispel the disturbing rumors
they've heard.
SCHINDLER
These are skilled munitions workers
- they are essential to the war
effort -
123.
The noise begins, his audience's angry reaction. Raising the
pitch of his own voice -
SCHINDLER
- It is my duty to supervise them -
and it is your duty to allow me -
He barely gets it all out before the protests drown him out.
The uproar reaches such a clamoring level there's no point in
his continuing.
INT. OFFICE, ADMINISTRATION BUILDING - PLASZOW DAY
The tenth page of Schindler's List, the signature page, curls
around the roller of a typewriter. Marcel Goldberg, Personnel
Clerk, Executor of Lists, carefully aligns it and types his
own name in a narrow space allowed by the bottom margin.
INT. CABARET - BERLIN - NIGHT
Stage show with political humor and songs. Club full of SS
officers, the most important of them over at Schindler's
table. He moves among them, like the great entertainer he is,
making sure everyone has enough to eat and drink, paying for
everything.
EXT. DEPOT - PLASZOW - DAY
A train full of people destined for Auschwitz pulls away from
the platform. As Goldberg gathers his paperwork, a prisoner
approaches him.
IDEK
Am I on the list?
GOLDBERG
What list is that?
He knows what the Idek means and Idek knows he knows. He
means Schindler's List.
GOLDBERG
The good list? Well, that depends,
doesn't it.
Idek knows that, too, and discreetly turns over to Goldberg a
couple of diamonds from the lining of his coat.
EXT. SCHINDLER'S BRINNLITZ FACTORY SITE - DAY
At a folding table in the middle of a field Schindler signs
checks and attaches them to Reich Main Office and Evacuation
Board and Department of Economy forms.
124.
(MORE)
Around him, the new camp is taking shape: Electric fences are
going up, watchtowers, barracks; shipments of heavy
equipment, huge Hilo machines, are being off-loaded from
flatbed train cars; SS engineers stand around frowning at the
lay of the land, some drainage problem no doubt.
INT. GOLDBERG'S OFFICE - PLASZOW - NIGHT
Names on a little notepad, the first few crossed out.
Goldberg types the next name - IDEK SCHINDEL - onto a page of
The List, squeezing it into the upper margin, and crosses it
out on the pad.
He rolls the page down, types another name, tires of the
exacting task, tears the handwritten page of names from the
notepad, crumples it and throws it away.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
Schindler, on his way back to his hotel after a night of
drinking, is jumped by three men, wrestled to the ground and
brutally kicked.
As the forms of his attackers move away, he catches a glimpse
of one of them - his "friend" from the bar when he first
arrived back in town.
INT. MECHANICS GARAGE - PLASZOW - DAY
Pfefferberg, his head under the hood of a German staff car,
adjusting the carburetor. Goldberg comes in.
GOLDBERG
Hey, Poldek, how's it going?
(Pfefferberg ignores him)
You know about the list? You're on
it.
PFEFFERBERG
Of course I'm on it.
GOLDBERG
You want to stay on it? What've you
got for me?
Pfefferberg glances up from his work and studies the
blackmailing collaborator for a long moment.
PFEFFERBERG
What've I got for you?
GOLDBERG 
125.
Takes diamonds to stay on this
list.
Pfefferberg suddenly attacks him with the wrench in his hand,
beating him across the shoulders and head with it.
PFEFFERBERG
I'll kill you, that's what I've got
for you.
Goldberg goes down, tries to scramble away on his knees, the
blows coming down hard on his back.
GOLDBERG
All right, all right, all right.
He makes it outside the garage and runs.
EXT. DEPOT - PLASZOW - DAY
A cattle car is coupled to another, the pin dropped into
place. On the platform, clerks at folding tables shuffle
paper while others mill around with clipboards, calling out
names.
Thousands of prisoners on the platform, some climbing onto
strings of slatted cars on opposing tracks, some already in
them, most standing in lines, changing lines, the end of one
virtually indistinguishable from the beginning of another,
saving their bribes for the most powerful figures here, the
guards who close the gates.
Paperwork. Lists of names. Pens in hands checking them off.
Some bound for Brinnlitz, the rest for Auschwitz, if they can
be properly sorted from one another.
Six year old Olek Rosner is allowed to stay in line with his
father Henry, but his mother is taken to another line
composed of women and girls. This segregation is the only
recognizable process going on; the others, if they exist, are
apparent only to the clerks and guards, and maybe not even to
them. It's chaos.
EXT. COUNTRYSIDE - NIGHT
A train snakes across the dark landscape.
INT. CATTLE CAR - MOVING - NIGHT
Stern, wedged into a corner of a crowded car. This train may
be headed for Schindler's hometown but it's no more
comfortable than the others on their way to AuschwitzBirkenau.
There are only male prisoners on board.
126.
EXT. RURAL DEPOT - POLAND - NIGHT
A small depot set down alongside tracks in the countryside.
INT. DEPOT - RURAL POLAND - NIGHT
The clicking of an incoming telegraph message stirs a napping
trainman in an otherwise deserted depot. He glances at it
perfunctorily, lumbers up and -
EXT. DEPOT - CONTINUOUS - NIGHT
- wearily crosses the platform to a switching lever. Pulling
at it, a section of rail separates from one trackline and
joins up with another.
The rails begin to quiver. The trainman glances off to an
approaching train in the distance, watches it come and
thunder past, then switches the rails back to their original
position.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - DAY
The train pulls into the small quiet Brinnlitz station. The
doors are opened and the prisoners begin climbing down. At
the far end of the platform, flanked by several SS guards,
stands Schindler. To his customary elegant attire he has
added a careless accoutrement, a Tyrolean hat.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - DAY
Graffiti scrawled on a wall in Czech reads (subtitle) "Keep
the Jewish Criminals out of Brinnlitz."
Leading a procession of nine hundred male Jewish "criminals"
through the center of town, Schindler ignores the angry
taunts and denouncements and the occasional rock hurled by
the good citizens of Brinnlitz lining the streets.
INT. BRINNLITZ MUNITIONS FACTORY - DAY
Under the towering Hilo machines, a meal of soup and bread
awaits the workers. As they're sitting down to it, Schindler
addresses them -
SCHINDLER
You'll be interested to know I
received a cable this morning from
the Personnel Office, Plaszow. The
women have left. They should be
arriving here sometime tomorrow.
127.
He sees Stern among the workers, almost allows a smile, turns
and walks away.
EXT. RURAL POLAND - DAY
The women's train clatters along tracks across bleak
countryside.
INT. CATTLE CAR - MOVING - DAY
In a corner of a crowded car, Pfefferberg's wife, Mila, peers
out through the slats. The rhythmic pounding of the wheels
over track is nearly deafening.
EXT. DEPOT - RURAL POLAND - DAY
Silence. Tight on the switching lever. Then the tracks. They
begin to vibrate.
INT. RURAL DEPOT - DAY
The clicking of the telegraph receiving a message is
disturbed by the flush of a toilet. The wire finishes and the
trainman emerges from the WC. He crosses to his desk and
picks up a newspaper, not even glancing up to -
EXT. DEPOT - SAME TIME - DAY
- the women's train thunders past the switch that sends it
veering off in a different direction than the men's train
took.
INT/EXT. TRAIN/RURAL POLAND - DAY
As the train clatters past small farms, the women peer out
with optimism through the slats at an idyllic image -
Kids ice skating on the frozen ground. Arcing in a figure 8,
one of them, a boy no more than six, glances to the
approaching train, then to another string of cattle cars,
empty, coming from the other direction. To those in the full
cars, he raises his hand up and across his neck making the
gesture of a throat being slit.
The smiles on the women's faces fade in confusion as they
look back at the figure of the smiling gesturing boy receding
in the distance.
INT. BARRACKS - DAY
A fly lands on the forearm of a sleeping man in a cot. A
sewing needle clutched in a small hand moves slowly through
the air. 
128.
The fly climbs over the hair on the arm, and the needle comes
down piercing it and the skin of the man - who doesn't move.
He's dead, but the boy with the needle isn't - yet.
He carefully pulls his catch from the tip of his "spear" and
puts it in his mouth. As he begins another hunting
expedition, the barracks is revealed to be impossibly crowded
- twelve men and boys on each of the four-tiered bunks lining
the walls. Moving past them and out of the barracks reveals -
EXT. AUSCHWITZ-BIRKENAU - CONTINUOUS - DAY
- row after row after row of barracks reaching to the birch
trees beyond electrified fences, pillars of dark smoke rising
from stacks into the sky, two sets of tracks running the
length of the camp, and, slowly backing through the arched
gatehouse, the train.
The women inside the cattle cars don't need a sign to tell
them where they are, they've seen this place in nightmares.
EXT. AUSCHWITZ-BIRKENAU - DAY
The stunned women climb down from the railcars onto the
concourse bisecting the already infamous camp. As they're
marched across the muddy yard by guards carrying truncheons,
Mila Pfefferberg stares at the place. It's so big, like a
city, only one in which the inhabitants reside strictly
temporarily. To Mila, under her breath -
REBECCA
Where are the clerks?
So often terrified by the sight of a clerk with a clipboard,
it is the absence of clerks which unsettles Rebecca now - as
though there remains no further reason to record their names.
Mila's eyes return to the constant smoke rising beyond the
birch trees at the settlement's western end.
INT. OFFICES - BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Schindler comes out of his office and, passing Stern's desk,
mumbles -
SCHINDLER
They're in Auschwitz.
Before Stern can react, Schindler is out the door.
EXT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - MOMENTS LATER - DAY
As he strides across the factory courtyard toward his
motorcycle, Schindler is intercepted by some Gestapo men who
have just emerged from their car.
129.
GESTAPO
Oskar Schindler?
SCHINDLER
How's it going?
GESTAPO
Your friend Amon Goeth has been
arrested.
SCHINDLER
(pause)
I'm sorry to hear that.
GESTAPO
There are some things that are
unclear. We need to talk.
SCHINDLER
I'd love to, it'll have to wait
until I get back.
The looks on their faces tell him he's not going anywhere.
SCHINDLER
All right, okay, let's talk.
GESTAPO
In Breslau.
SCHINDLER
Breslau? I can't go to Breslau. Not
now.
These men are serious.
INT. DELOUSING PLANT - AUSCHWITZ - DAY
Mila stares up at a dry shower nozzle, fearing the killing
gas she expects to soon seep from the little holes. There's a
line of Schindler women, stripped like her, standing inside a
stone structure full of the ominous shower heads, waiting,
staring.
A clang, like radiant heat rising, tells them a valve has
been turned. The exposed plumbing coming out of the walls
begins to shake as whatever is inside surges through, rattles
across an elbow joint, through pipes branching off, jiggles
the shower heads as it advances, reaches them and... icy
water sprays out.
130.
EXT. AUSCHWITZ - DAY
A young silver-haired doctor moves slowly along rows of
Schindler's women, considering each with a pleasant smile
even as he makes his selections, with tiny gestures, for the
death chambers. He pauses in front Mrs. Dresner.
MENGELE
How old are you, Mother?
She could lie, and he'd have her killed for it. She could
tell the truth, and he'd have her killed for that, too.
MRS. DRESNER
Sir, a mistake's been made, we're
not supposed to be here. We work
for Oskar Schindler. We're
Schindler Jews.
Mengele nods pensively, understandingly, it seems. Then -
MENGELE
And who on earth is Oskar
Schindler?
He glances around hopelessly. One of the SS guards who
accompanied the women from Plaszow speaks up -
PLASZOW GUARD
He had a factory is Cracow.
Enamelware.
Mengele nods again as if the information were valuable, as if
it meant something to him. It doesn't.
MENGELE
A potmaker?
He smiles to himself as he gestures Mrs. Dresner out of the
line and into another. Continuing with the "examination," he
lets Danka stay in line, shifts the next two women, leaves
the next...
INT. CELL - SS PRISON, BRESLAU - DAY
In a dank cell, in uniform, Amon Goeth waits. Schindler is on
his way, hopefully. Maybe he's already here. Schindler will
vouch for him. Schindler will straighten this out.
INT. SS PRISON, BRESLAU - DAY
In a large room, Schindler sits before a panel of twelve
sober Bureau V investigators and a judge of the SS court.
131.
INVESTIGATOR
Everything you say will be held in
confidence. You are not under
investigation. Mr. Goeth is. He's
being held on charges of
embezzlement and racketeering.
You're here at his request to
corroborate his denials. Our
information into his financial
speculations comes from many
sources. On his behalf there is
only you. We know you are close
friends. We know this is hard for
you. But we must ask you -
SCHINDLER
He stole our country blind.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
In Schindler's absence, the workers attempt to operate the
unfamiliar machines, try to figure out the unfamiliar process
of manufacturing artillery shells. There's movement, noise,
the machines are running, but little is being produced.
Untersturmfuhrer Josef Liepold, the Commandant of Schindler's
new subcamp, moves through the factory conducting an
impromptu inspection. He points out to a guard a kid no more
than nine, sorting casings at a work table, and another boy,
ten or eleven, carrying a box.
EXT. BARRACKS - AUSCHWITZ - NIGHT
Mila and Helen cross back toward their barracks carrying a
large heavy pot of broth. Not more than a hundred meters away
stand the birch trees and crematoria, the smoke pluming even
now, at night.
Out of the darkness appear "apparitions," skeletal figures
which surround the two woman, or rather the soup pot between
them, dipping little metal cups into it, over and over.
Too startled to speak, Mila can only stare. The apparitions
clamor around the pot a moment more, then furtively slip back
into the same darkness from which they came. Mila and Helen
exchange a glance. The pot is empty.
MILA
Where's Schindler now?
132.
INT. HOSS' HOUSE - AUSCHWITZ - NIGHT
In his den, over cognac, Auschwitz Commandant Rudolf Hoss
considers the documents Schindler has brought: the list, the
travel papers, the Evacuation Board authorizations. Hoss nods
at them, then at Schindler.
HOSS
You're right, a clerical error has
been made.
(pause)
Let me offer you this in apology
for the inconvenience. I have a
shipment coming in tomorrow, I'll
cut you three hundred units from
it. New ones. These are fresh.
Schindler seems to think about the offer as he nurses his
drink. It's "tempting."
HOSS
The train comes, we turn it around,
it's yours.
SCHINDLER
I appreciate it. I want these.
The ones on the list in Hoss's hand. Silence. Then:
HOSS
You shouldn't get stuck on names.
Why, because you get to know them? Because you begin to see
them as human beings? Schindler suddenly has the awful
feeling that the women are already dead. Hoss misinterprets
the look.
HOSS
That's right, it creates a lot of
paperwork.
EXT. CONCOURSE - AUSCHWITZ - DAY
A large assembly of women. Guards calling out names from a
list, Schindler's List. As each woman and girl steps out of
line, a guard unceremoniously brushes a swathe of red paint
across her clothes. New columns are formed.
EXT. TRAIN YARD - AUSCHWITZ - DAY
Schindler, standing at the end the platform stone-faced,
watches the women whose names he is "stuck on," whose clothes
are slashed with red paint, climbing onto the cattle cars.
133.
As the cars fill, a train on another track arrives - the
"fresh units" Schindler turned down. As gates of the women's
cars begin to close, the gates of the arriving cattle cars
are opened and the new people spill out, making the guards'
job tougher trying to keep them all separated.
A horrified cry suddenly breaks through the noise of the
engines. The daughter of one of Schindler's women is not
being allowed to board the train. Another cry erupts, and
another, as the children of other Schindlerjuden are
prevented from climbing on.
Schindler becomes aware of what's happening and, wedging
through the crowds, passes over the children from the
arriving train, to try to corral these particular kids, these
girls, who are now echoing their mothers' tortured cries.
As Schindler struggles to herd them together, Manci Rosner,
locked into one of the cars, notices - and she can't believe
it - her son, Olek - among the hundreds of arriving prisoners
moving past the processing tables and into the camp.
MANCI ROSNER
(screams)
Olek -
On the other side of the electrified fence, six year old Olek
Rosner turns to the desperate cry and sees, behind the slats
of the cars, not just his mother, but others too, calling out
to their sons and husbands filing into the camp.
Unaware of this new drama, occupied with his own, Schindler
manages to gather the fifteen or twenty girls, his girls,
some of them no more than seven years old, and, in the middle
of the crowded platform, appeals to a guard -
SCHINDLER
These are mine. They're on the
list. These are my workers. They
should be on the train.
He points across to the women's train. The last of the gates
are being closed, and a guard is signalling to the engineer
to pull out amid the cries of the mothers, some to their
daughters who aren't on it, some, on the other side, to their
sons and husbands in the camp. Pointing to the girls -
SCHINDLER
They're skilled munitions workers.
They're essential.
The guard glances from the frantic gentleman to the anxious
brood around him. These are essential workers?
134.
GUARD
They're girls.
SCHINDLER
Yes.
Schindler is nodding his head, trying to think. The train
wheels are beginning to move. The women are shrieking their
sons' names, their daughters' names, and the guard, who's
heard it all, every excuse imaginable, is just turning away
when Schindler thrusts his smallest finger at him.
SCHINDLER
Their fingers. They polish the
inside's of shell casings. How else
do you expect me to polish the
inside of a 45 millimeter shell
casing?
The guard stares at him dumbly. This he hasn't heard. He
signals to another guard who unlocks, as it's moving, the
last car of the train and the girls are allowed to jump on.
As it pulls out, Manci Rosner stares at the figure of her
small son and his father standing together at the wire.
There, Henry is pulling his sleeve up, pointing to the bloody
tattoo on his arm, and yelling to his wife on the departing
train -
HENRY
Can you see it? Look. The clerks
registered us. We're worth keeping
track of.
He quickly undoes his son's sleeve and the boy thrusts his
own arm proudly into the air. Tight on the numbers etched in
his skin.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - DAY
Like a mirage in the distance they appear - the women, the
girls, guards, Schindler - marching across a field toward the
factory.
At the perimeter of the camp, at the wire, the men watch the
approaching procession. It appears to them that the women are
covered in blood - or - could it be paint?
Josef Bau spots Rebecca. Pfefferberg, his wife. Mr. Dresner
sees his, and his daughter, Danka.
135.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
The machines are silent, the people aren't. Women are in
their husbands' arms. Daughters in their fathers'. There's
food on the tables but it's largely ignored.
Manci Rosner and the other women whose families have been
confiscated, watch the reunions blankly.
INT. SS MESS HALL - SAME TIME - DAY
Schindler stands before the assembled camp guards. They're
seated at the long tables, their food getting cold, waiting
for him to say whatever it is he has to say.
SCHINDLER
Under Department W provisions, it
is unlawful to kill a worker
without just cause. Under the
Businesses Compensation Fund I am
entitled to file damage claims for
such deaths. If you shoot without
thinking, you go to prison and I
get paid, that's how it works.
(pause)
So there will be no summary
executions here. There will be no
interference of any kind with
production. In hopes of ensuring
that, guards will no longer be
allowed on the factory floor
without my authorization.
His eyes meet Liepold's, hold his icy stare, then return to
the guards, most of whom look like tired middle-aged
reservists.
SCHINDLER
For your cooperation, you have my
gratitude.
As he steps away he gestures to some kitchen workers. They
tear open cases of schnapps and begin setting the bottles out
on the tables.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Schindler strolls through his factory looking over the
shoulders of the workers, nodding his approval. The place is
in full operation, finally; the people, having figured out
the complicated Hilos, turning out shells by the caseload.
Schindler pauses at one of the machines.
136.
SCHINDLER
How's it going?
JOSEF BAU
Good, sir. It's taken a while to
calibrate the machines, but it's
going good now.
SCHINDLER
Good.
Schindler nods. Then frowns. He leans down and taps at the
crystal of one of the gauges.
SCHINDLER
This isn't right, is it?
Bau kneels down, takes a look. It looks right to him.
Reaching over, Schindler changes the calibration of the
machine with an cavalier adjustment to a knob - and all the
gauge readings shift.
SCHINDLER
There. That looks right.
He wanders off and Bau stares after him. He's just screwed up
settings that took weeks to get right.
A soot-blackened worker shoveling coal into the stokehole of
one of the furnaces notices Schindler moving past.
GOLDBERG
Sir?
Schindler glances back at the grime-covered man beckoning to
him to come closer. The Direktor obliges, but not so close as
to risk dirtying his suit.
GOLDBERG
How're you doing?
SCHINDLER
Pretty good.
Goldberg leans a little closer to gain confidentiality.
GOLDBERG
This isn't what I do shoveling
coal. I don't mind it, but you
should know I could be of much
greater value to you in the front
office working with Stern. We
worked together in Plaszow.
137.
SCHINDLER
Yeah, I know what you did in
Plaszow.
Schindler smiles faintly, and leaves Goldberg to toil at the
furnaces for the rest of the war. He crosses the factory and
comes up to another worker, Levartov, the hinge-maker, at a
machine buffing shells.
SCHINDLER
How's it going, Rabbi?
LEVARTOV
Good, sir.
Schindler nods, watches him work, eventually glances away.
SCHINDLER
Sun's going down.
Levartov, following Schindler's gaze, nods uncertainly.
SCHINDLER
It is Friday, isn't it?
LEVARTOV
Is it?
SCHINDLER
You should be preparing for the
Sabbath, shouldn't you? What are
you doing here?
Levartov just stares. It's been years since he's been
allowed, indeed inclined, to perform Sabbath rites.
SCHINDLER
I've got some wine in my office,
why don't we go over there, I'll
give it to you.
Schindler heads off. The rabbi stares after him. Schindler
gestures back, offering casually -
SCHINDLER
Come on.
Levartov looks around. Finally, he hangs up his goggles and
follows after Schindler.
138.
INT. WORKERS BARRACKS - NIGHT
Under the shadow of a watchtower, among the roof-high tiers
of bunks strung with laundry, Levartov recites Kiddush over a
cup of wine to workers gathered around him.
INT. GUARDS BARRACKS - NIGHT
On their bunks, the guards relax with schnapps, cards and
magazines. One of them becomes distracted by a distant sound.
Some of the others begin to hear it.
GUARD
What is that?
Conversations cease. The barracks gradually becomes quiet,
silent, all the guards straining to hear. It sounds like...
singing. It sounds like Yiddish singing.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - SAME TIME - NIGHT
On a watchtower, a night sentry, unsure where it's coming
from, listens to the distant singing. It seems like it's
emanating from the surrounding hills, from the trees.
INT. LIEPOLD'S QUARTERS - SAME TIME - NIGHT
At his small desk, Liepold is typing a letter, denouncing
Schindler most likely. The pounding keys bury all other
sounds but when he pauses to read what he's typed, he hears
it, the singing, faint, far away. He goes to his window,
peers out, listens for a moment more, then hears nothing.
Only the night creatures.
INT. APARTMENT BUILDING - BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
The door to an apartment opens from the inside revealing
Emilie Schindler. She coolly considers the visitor on her
doorstep, her estranged husband, looking great as usual,
bottle of wine in his hand, smiling as if nothing is wrong
between them, as if nothing is wrong in the entire world.
INT. EMILIE'S APARTMENT - NIGHT
The two of them at the kitchen table in a modest apartment,
drinking, at least he is. He's trying to ask her something,
but he's not sure how to put it, he wants to get it right.
Finally the words just tumble out -
SCHINDLER
I want you to come work for me.
139.
There, he's said it. But the bewildered look on Emilie's face
wonders, That's what was hard for you to say?
SCHINDLER
You don't have to live with me, I
wouldn't ask that.
(pause)
It's a nice place. You'd like it.
It looks awful. You get used to
that.
She's the only woman he's ever known who could make him
nervous just sitting across a table from him, saying nothing.
SCHINDLER
All right -
(now he'll be honest)
We can spend time together that
way. We can see each other, see how
it goes - without the strain of -
whatever you want to call it when a
man, when a woman, go out to
dinner, go have a drink, go to a
party -
EMILIE
Dating -
SCHINDLER
This way we'll see each other at
work, there we are, same place, we
see how it goes...
His voice trails off. A shrug adds, What do you think? She
doesn't answer, but she does love him. He loves her, too. It
really is a shame they're not right for each other and never
will be.
INT. OFFICE FOYER - BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Glancing up from a letter from the Armaments Board, Stern
notices Schindler and Emilie coming through - another of Herr
Director's mistresses the accountant assumes - and gets up
from his desk to intercept them.
STERN
We need to talk.
SCHINDLER
Itzhak Stern, Emilie Schindler. My
wife.
140.
Like the doormen and waiters of Cracow, Stern too never
imagined Schindler was married and has trouble hiding his
astonishment now. Managing finally to extend a hand to her -
STERN
How do you do?
EMILIE
How do you do?
SCHINDLER
Stern is my accountant and friend.
It sounds strange to Stern hearing Schindler actually say it;
he's never said it before.
SCHINDLER
Emilie's offered to come to work.
We need to find something
interesting for her to do.
Stern's glance shifts to the desk outside Schindler's office
where Ingrid sits brushing nail polish - but Schindler's
slight shake of his head to him says, No, not there.
STERN
(pause)
Maybe the clinic.
SCHINDLER
The clinic. Perfect.
His glance to his wife finds hers on Ingrid across the room,
whose look up senses immediately that this woman looking at
her isn't another of Schindler's mistresses. She quickly caps
the nail polish and feeds her typewriter with paper.
SCHINDLER
(to Emilie)
Or here, that'd be fine, whatever
you want.
She considers him wearily. His shrug promises her he'll get
rid of Ingrid is that's what she wants; doesn't want to, but
he will. Eventually -
EMILIE
The clinic.
SCHINDLER
The clinic. Good. Done.
As her husband steps away, Emilie glances to Stern.
141.
(MORE)
STERN
That's very generous of you.
The look that passes between them admits each knows exactly
what's going on here, what Ingrid is to Schindler, what
Emilie is, the whole thing.
EMILIE
Isn't it.
She moves off after Schindler, who glances back to find Stern
gesturing at him to join him for a private conference.
SCHINDLER
Not now.
STERN
It's important.
SCHINDLER
(to Emilie)
Go on in, I'll be right there.
He points past Ingrid to his office and follows after Stern
to his desk to hear some disquieting news.
STERN
We've received an angry complaint
from the Armaments Board.
He hands Schindler a letter, but Schindler's attention is
back across the room, lamenting the close proximity of his
wife and mistress.
STERN
The artillery shells, the tank
shells, rocket casings, apparently
all of them have failed qualitycontrol
tests.
Schindler dismisses the problem with a cavalier shrug.
SCHINDLER
Well, that's to be expected. They
have to understand these are startup
problems. This isn't pots and
pans, this is a precise business.
I'll write them a letter.
STERN
They're withholding payment.
SCHINDLER 
142.
Well, sure. So would I. So would
you. I wouldn't worry about it.
We'll get it right one of these
days.
But Stern is worried about it.
STERN
There's a rumor you've been going
around miscalibrating the machines.
(Schindler doesn't deny
it)
That's not a good idea.
SCHINDLER
No?
Stern slowly shakes his head, No.
STERN
They could shut us down, send us
back to Auschwitz.
Schindler nods soberly, in agreement it seems.
SCHINDLER
All right, call around, find out
where we can buy shells and buy
them. We'll pass them off as ours.
Stern's not sure he sees the logic. Whether the shells are
manufactured here or elsewhere, they'll still eventually
reach their intended destination, into the hearts and heads
of Germany's enemies.
STERN
I know what you're saying, but I
don't see the difference. Whether
they're made here or somewhere
else, they're still -
SCHINDLER
You don't see a difference? I see a
difference.
STERN
You'll lose a lot of money, that's
the difference.
SCHINDLER
Fewer shells will be made.
That's the main difference. The only one Schindler cares
about. Silence. Then:
143.
SCHINDLER
Stern, if this factory ever
produces a shell that can actually
be fired, I'll be very unhappy.
INT. HOUSE - BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
Schindler and Emilie, her arm in his, stand around like
unwanted guests at the party. They probably are. Him anyway.
The other guests include local politicians who fought and
failed to keep his camp out of Brinnlitz. Whenever his glance
meets one of theirs, they smile tightly.
SCHINDLER
(to Emilie)
Isn't this nice.
It's not at all nice. He feels out of place, a feeling he's
not accustomed to. Fortunately, a man in uniform, someone
Schindler can relate to, approaches cheerfully, his hand
outstretched.
RASCH
Oskar, good of you to come.
SCHINDLER
Are you kidding, I never miss a
party. Police Chief Rasch, my wife
Emilie.
RASCH
How do you do?
EMILIE
You have a lovely home.
It is nice. Big. The man lives well.
RASCH
Thank you.
SCHINDLER
I need a drink.
RASCH
Oh, God, you don't have a drink?
SCHINDLER
(to Emilie)
Wine?
She nods. Schindler goes off in search of the bartender.
Rasch watches after him.
144.
RASCH
Your husband's a very generous man.
She smiles wryly.
INT. RASCHIS STUDY - LATER - NIGHT
Rasch and Schindler sharing cognac in the privacy of the
Police Chief's study. Beyond the closed doors, the party
continues, the sounds filtering in.
SCHINDLER
I need guns.
Rasch calmly nurses his drink, his eyes revealing nothing of
what's going on behind them, except that the statement
requires some elaboration.
SCHINDLER
One of these days the Russians are
going to show up unannounced at my
gate. I'd like the chance to defend
myself. I'd like my wife to have
that chance. My secretaries.
RASCH
(pause; then,
philosophically)
We're losing the war, aren't we.
SCHINDLER
It kind of looks that way.
RASCH
(blithely)
Pistols?
SCHINDLER
Pistols, rifles, carbines...
(long pause)
I'd be grateful.
Rasch smiles faintly. Yes, he's familiar, as are officials
throughout much of Europe, with the gratitude of Oskar
Schindler.
INT. MACHINE SHOP - BRINNLITZ CAMP - NIGHT
Poldek Pfefferberg holds up a pistol, feels its weight,
glances to Schindler standing at a window.
SCHINDLER
Just in case.
145.
Pfefferberg stuffs the gun into his belt and kneels beside an
open crate of weapons - revolvers, rifles, an old carbine. As
he inspects them, Schindler looks out the window at guards in
the towers and others patrolling the perimeter wire.
INT. FACTORY - DAY
From high above the factory, Stern can be seen among the
machines talking with a worker. The man points up and returns
to his work.
Stern stares up, puzzled. He locates a ladder that connects
the shop-floor to a series of overhead planks and, with
trepidation, climbs.
He reaches a shaky landing high above the machines, navigates
the primitive catwalks with great care, comes to a large
water tank near the workshop ceiling.
SCHINDLER
Stern.
Above the rim of the tank, amid rising steam, Schindler's
head appears. Then disappears. Stern climbs a set of rungs on
the tank, reaches the top and finds inside, lolling in the
steaming water, Schindler and Ingrid.
STERN
Excuse me.
Neither Schindler nor Ingrid seems the least bit embarrassed.
Only Stern. He tries hard to pretend the woman isn't there,
but he just can't.
STERN
I'll talk to you later.
SCHINDLER
No, no, what, what is it?
Schindler floats over closer to him, waits for him to report
whatever it is he has come to report, leans closer. Finally,
quietly -
STERN
Do you have any money I don't know
about? Hidden away someplace?
Schindler thinks long and hard...
SCHINDLER
No.
146.
(MORE)
Silence except for the gently lapping water. Half-joking -
SCHINDLER
Why, am I broke?
Stern glances away, doesn't answer - which is an answer. And
a slight, slight smile, a gambler's philosophical smile upon
being purged of his wealth, appears on Schindler's face.
EXT. RURAL BRINNLITZ - DAY
In the distance, a lone boxcar, stark against the winter
landscape. There are patches of snow on the ground. A cold
wind blows through bare trees.
SCHINDLER (V.O.)
Poldek.
INT. MACHINE SHOP - BRINNLITZ CAMP - DAY
Tight on Poldek Pfefferberg's eyes behind a welder's mask. He
turns from his work to the voice, welding torch in his hand.
EXT. RURAL BRINNLITZ - DAY
The torch firing at ice as hard as metal, blue flame, white
steam. Pfefferberg's eyes behind the mask again,
concentrating.
Around the abandoned boxcar, in the gruesome cold, stand
Schindler, Emilie, a doctor, some workers and some SS guards,
watching, waiting.
Pfefferberg steps back. Sledge hammers pound at locks. Hands
pull at levers. The doors begin to slide.
Out of darkness, from inside the boxcar as the doors slide
open, Schindler's face is revealed, tight. He stares for an
interminable moment before walking slowly away.
Inside the boxcar is a tangle of limbs, a pyramid of corpses,
frozen white.
From a distance, a tableau: the boxcar, the workers and
guards and Emilie outside it, Schindler, off to himself
several steps away, all of them still as statues.
EXT. CATHOLIC CEMETERY - OUTSIDE BRINNLITZ
Beyond a country church, among the stone markers of a small
cemetery, walk Schindler and a priest.
SCHINDLER 
147.
It's been suggested I cremate them
in my furnaces. As a Catholic I
will not. As a human being I will
not.
The priest nods; he seems relatively empathic and offers an
alternative -
PRIEST
There's an area beyond the church
reserved for the burial of
suicides. Maybe I can convince the
parish council to allow them to be
buried there.
SCHINDLER
These aren't suicides.
The priest knows that. But he also knows that the provisions
of Canon Law regarding who can and cannot be buried in
consecrated ground are narrow.
SCHINDLER
These are victims of a great
murder.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
In a corner of the factory, workers hammer at pine lumber.
They are building coffins.
EXT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
As workers harness horses to carts, others hoist the coffins
into them. Schindler is there, watching. He glances up at one
of the guard towers, expecting, perhaps, to be felled by a
bullet.
EXT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Beyond the wire, Rabbi Levartov leads the horse-drawn carts.
Around him walk a minyan - a quorum of ten males necessary
for the rite. A few guards lag behind.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - SAME TIME - DAY
Work continues, but it's apparent in their eyes they are only
physically here; in spirit they are all walking alongside the
carts, one great moral force.
The roar of a machine suddenly, inexplicably, dies. Then
another. And another. Schindler, standing at the main power
panel, pulls the last of the switches, and the factory
plunges into absolute silence... 
148.
(MORE)
out of which faint sounds from the outside gradually emerge,
sounds that, for years now, have been smothered by the noisy
machinery of industry and war - the sounds of nature, which
CONTINUE OVER:
EXT. CATHOLIC CEMETERY - DAY
Just beyond the perimeter of the Catholic cemetery, the
minyan quietly recites Kaddish over the dead as their coffins
are lowered into individual graves.
Then, there is only a low breathing of wind...
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - DAY
Amon Goeth, in civilian clothes, emerges from a car. His
eyes, sallow from inadequate sleep, sweep across the
fortified compound with envy. It's a nice place Oskar's got
here.
INT. OFFICE - BRINNLITZ FACTORY - SAME TIME - DAY
Stern, at a window, stares down at Goeth beside the car.
Softly, gravely -
STERN
What's he doing here?
Schindler appears beside Stern, glances down. He's lost
weight, Goeth. The old suit he wears seems too big for him.
Alone down there he seems disoriented.
SCHINDLER
Probably looking for a handout.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Rebecca Bau, and others, glance up from their work to an
apparition from the pit of their foulest dreams - Amon Goeth
crossing through the factory.
Schindler's arm drapes around the killer's shoulder as if he
were a long lost brother. Leading him across the shop-floor
he proudly points out the huge thundering Hilo machines.
INT. OFFICES, BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Schindler takes an old suitcase from his office closet and
sets it on a coffee table. He snaps it open revealing Goeth's
uniforms and medals in mothballs. The ex-Oberstrumfuhrer
reaches in and touches the fabric and ribbons reverently,
then glances up to his friend who has kept them safe.
GOETH 
149.
(MORE)
Every one of them betrayed me.
Hujar, Toffel, Leo John, Scherner -
they all ratted on me to save their
own necks. Every one of them.
Except you.
As Schindler pours them each a drink, Goeth picks up one of
the medals and turns it over in his hand. His nails haven't
been manicured for a long time.
GOETH
This is what I have left. After all
I did for them, this is what I have
left, this box and this suit. Look
at this suit -
The one he's wearing. He pulls at a frayed lapel with
disdain. Schindler hands him a cognac and -
SCHINDLER
That's no measure of a man's
success. It's fabric, thread,
buttons -
GOETH
This is my best fuckin suit, Oskar -
SCHINDLER
Was anyone looking at your suit
when you came through this factory?
Was one person looking at your
suit? They were looking at you
face. And in your face they still
see death.
(pause)
That's failure?
A small measure of pride creeps back into Goeth's eyes. They
do still fear him, don't they.
INT. OUTER OFFICES - SAME TIME - DAY
Beyond the frosted glass of Schindler's office door, Stern
can see the wavering forms of the two Nazi Party members
sharing cognac.
INT. SCHINDLER'S OFFICE - CONTINUED - DAY
The bottle in Schindler's hand tips over Goeth's glass,
refilling it.
SCHINDLER
What can I do to help you out? I'd
give you a managerial post if the 
150.
SCHINDLER(CONT'D)
SS would sit still for -
GOETH
Yeah, I know, they'd never let you.
SCHINDLER
Let me give you some money at
least.
Goeth tries to shake his head "no" while meaning "yes," but
when Schindler doesn't rise to the bait, he has to wonder if
he did it wrong.
SCHINDLER
Well, I wish there was something I
could do for you.
GOETH
Helen.
Schindler is caught completely unprepared. He stares at
Goeth, then glances away, his mind racing.
GOETH
You could give me Helen back. I
miss her.
SCHINDLER
She's dead, Amon.
Goeth stares at the back of Schindler's head, parazlyzed by
the news. After a long moment, he manages a breath.
GOETH
What?
Schindler turns back with a look that wishes he had told his
friend as soon as he saw him.
SCHINDLER
I'm sorry.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - DAY
Drunk and depressed, Goeth comes through the factory again
carrying the suitcase. Schindler's at his side, steering him
to some degree.
Goeth's hand comes up to his cheek as if to brush away a
bothersome fly. But it isn't a fly. One of the workers has
spit on him. He turns in disbelief.
151.
Silence as his hand drops to his side, to the holster he
forgets isn't there. He glances around for SS guards - who
aren't there - and looks to Schindler thoroughly confused.
GOETH
(whisper)
Where are the guards?
SCHINDLER
The guards aren't allowed on the
factory floor. They make my workers
nervous.
Goeth stares at him bewildered. Then again at the worker who
spit. Then at other workers, the resolve in their eyes. They
know he has no power here, and sense he has no power
anywhere.
Is this a dream? Goeth's own eyes drift to a woman at one of
the machines, her face turned partly away from him. She dares
a look over her shoulder and he sees that it's Helen.
He stares, first at her, then at Schindler, knowing suddenly
that he's the betrayer... but also that there's absolutely
nothing he can do about it.
SCHINDLER
Come on.
He'll see Goeth out; that's the extent of what he'll do for
him. He steps toward the door and the workers watch as Goeth,
impotent, follows.
INT. GUARDS' BARRACKS - EVENING
A guard slowly turns the dial of a radio, finding and losing
in static several different voices in several languages, none
of them lasting more than a moment.
Depression hangs over the barracks. Most of the guards are
straining to hear the news they've been fearing for some time
now, some on their bunks just staring, one at a window
peering out at the black face of a forest as if expecting, at
any moment, to see Russian or American troops appear.
INT. WORKERS' BARRACKS - SAME TIME - EVENING
Another radio. Workers, like the guards, straining to hear.
The dial finds, faint, mired in static, the idiosyncratic
voice of Winston Churchill.
152.
INT. LIEPOLD'S QUARTERS - SAME TIME - EVENING
Schindler on Liepold's doorstep. The two men considering each
other across the threshold. Radio static filters out from
Liepold's room. The word "Eisenhower" cuts through before the
speaker's voice is buried again.
SCHINDLER
It's time the guards came into the
factory.
He turns and walks away.
INT. BRINNLITZ FACTORY - NIGHT
All twelve hundred workers and all the guards are gathered
for the first time on the factory floor. Tension and
uncertainty surround them. It's ominously quiet. Then -
SCHINDLER
The unconditional surrender of
Germany has just been announced. At
midnight tonight the war is over.
It is not his intention to elicit celebration. Indeed, his
words, echoing and fading in the cavernous factory, echo the
doubts they all feel.
SCHINDLER
Tomorrow, you'll begin the process
of looking for survivors of your
families. In many cases you won't
find them. After six long years of
murder, victims are being mourned
throughout the world.
Not by Untersturmfuhrer Liepold. He stands with his men,
dying to lift his rifle and fire.
SCHINDLER
We've survived. Some of you have
come up to me and thanked me. Thank
yourselves. Thank your fearless
Stern, and others among you, who,
worrying about you, have faced
death every moment.
(glancing away)
Thank you.
He's looking at the guards, thanking them, which thoroughly
confuses the workers. Just when they thought they knew where
his sentiments lay, he's thanking guards.
153.
(MORE)
SCHINDLER
You've shown extraordinary
discipline. You've behaved humanely
here. You should be proud of
yourselves.
Or is he attempting to adjust reality, to destroy the SS as
combatants, to alter the self-image of both the guards and
the prisoners? Moving across the SS men's faces, they remain
inscrutable. Schindler turns his attention back to the
workers, and, not at all like a confession, but rather like
simple statements of fact:
SCHINDLER
I'm a member of the Nazi party. I'm
a munitions manufacturer. I'm a
profiteer of slave labor, I'm a
criminal. At midnight, you'll be
free and I'll be hunted.
(pause)
I'll remain with you until five
minutes after midnight. After which
time, and I hope you'll forgive me,
I have to flee.
That worries the workers. Whenever he leaves, something
terrible always seems to happen.
SCHINDLER
In memory of the countless victims
among your people, I ask us to
observe three minutes of silence.
In the quiet, in the silence, drifting slowly across the
faces of the workers - the elderly, the lame, teenagers,
wives beside husbands, children beside their parents,
families together - it becomes clear, if it wasn't before,
that both as a prison and a manufacturing enterprise, the
Brinnlitz camp has been one long sustained confidence game.
Schindler has never stood still so long in his life. He does
now, though, framed by his giant Hilo machines, silent at the
close of the noisiest of wars, his head bowed, mourning the
many dead.
When he finally does look up he sees that he is the last to
do so. The faces, few of which he recognizes, are all looking
at him. He turns to speak to the guards along the wall again.
SCHINDLER
I know you've received orders from
our Commandant - which he's
received from his superiors - to 
154.
SCHINDLER(CONT'D)
dispose of the population of this
camp.
Apprehension spreads across the factory like a wave.
Pfefferberg tightens his grip on the pistol under his coat.
His ragtag irregulars do the same, the rest of their ersatz
"arsenal" concealed behind a machine. To the guards:
SCHINDLER
Now would be the time to do it.
They're all here. This is your
opportunity.
The guards hold their weapons, as they have from the moment
they arrived here tonight, at attention, waiting it seems, to
be given the official order from their Commander, Liepold,
who appears ready to give it.
SCHINDLER
Or...
(he shrugs)
... you could leave. And return to
your families as men instead of
murderers.
Long, long silence. Finally, one of the guards slowly lowers
his rifle, breaks ranks and walks away. Then another. And
another. And another. Another.
When the last is gone, the workers consider Liepold. He
appears more an oddity than a threat. He is more an oddity
than a threat. And he knows it. He turns and leaves.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - NIGHT
A watchtower. Abandoned. The perimeter wire. No sentries. The
guard barracks. Deserted. The SS is long gone.
INT. METALWORKS - NIGHT
Strange tools fashioned from sewing needles and screwdriver
handles on a workbench. The most medieval of them is
selected, probes the recesses of a man's open mouth, pries at
a gold filling in a molar.
INT. SCHINDLER'S QUARTERS - SAME TIME - NIGHT
A suitcase yawning open. Two silk shirts set onto clothes
already in it. Schindler moves across to a dresser and
gathers socks from a drawer.
155.
INT. METALWORKS - CONTINUED - NIGHT
The flame of a welding torch fires at extracted fillings,
melting them down. Pliers drop another into the small pool of
gold.
INT. SCHINDLER'S QUARTERS - CONTINUED - NIGHT
Hand raking toiletries into a small leather bag. Schindler
carries it into the other room, place it into one of the two
suitcases on the bed and snaps the latches.
INT. METALWORKS - CONTINUED - NIGHT
Wulken the jeweler works quickly to form the melted gold into
a band. It's crude but it'll have to do; there's not a lot of
time. With a makeshift engraving tool he begins etching a
brief inscription along the inner curve.
EXT. COURTYARD - BRINNLITZ CAMP - NIGHT
Schindler and Emilie emerge from his quarters, each carrying
a suitcase. In the dark, some distance away from the
Mercedes, stand all eleven hundred workers. As the Schindlers
cross the courtyard to the car, Stern and Levartov approach,
the rabbi with some papers.
LEVARTOV
We've written a letter trying to
explain things. In case you're
captured. Every worker has signed
it.
Schindler sees a list of signatures beginning below the
typewritten text and continuing for several pages. He pockets
it, this new list of names.
SCHINDLER
Thank you.
Stern glances away to the assembled workers who are parting
for Pfefferberg, Wulken and a couple of others coming
through. They reach the group by the car and Wulken hands
Stern, who hands Schindler, the finished ring.
Schindler sees that it's a gold band, like a wedding ring. He
notices the inscription and glances up to Stern.
STERN
It's Hebrew. It says, 'Whoever
saves one life, saves the world.'
156.
Schindler slips the ring onto a finger, admires it a moment,
glances to Stern and Wulken and Pfefferberg nodding his
thanks, then seems to withdraw.
SCHINDLER
(to himself)
I could've got more out...
Stern isn't sure he heard right. Schindler steps away from
him, from his wife, from the car, from the workers.
SCHINDLER
(to himself)
I could've got more... if I'd
just... I don't know, if I'd
just... I could've got more...
STERN
Oskar, there are eleven hundred
people who are alive because of
you. Look at them.
He can't.
SCHINDLER
If I'd made more money... I threw
away so much money, you have no
idea. If I'd just...
STERN
There will be generations because
of what you did.
SCHINDLER
I didn't do enough.
STERN
You did so much.
Schindler starts to lose it, the tears coming. Stern, too.
The look on Schindler's face as his eyes sweep across the
faces of the workers is one of apology, begging them to
forgive him for not doing more.
SCHINDLER
This car. Goeth would've bought
this car. Why did I keep the car?
Ten people, right there, ten more I
could've got.
(looking around)
This pin -
157.
He rips the elaborate Hakenkreus, the swastika, from his
lapel and holds it out to Stern pathetically.
SCHINDLER
Two people. This is gold. Two more
people. He would've given me two
for it. At least one. He would've
given me one. One more. One more
person. A person, Stern. For this.
One more. I could've gotten one
more person and I didn't.
He completely breaks down, weeping convulsively, the emotion
he's been holding in for years spilling out, the guilt
consuming him.
SCHINDLER
They killed so many people...
(Stern, weeping too,
embraces him)
They killed so many people...
From above, from a watchtower, Stern can be seen down below,
trying to comfort Schindler. Eventually, they separate, and
Schindler and Emilie climb into the Mercedes.
As the car slowly pulls out through the gates of the camp and
onto the road, Stern climbs to a vantage point to watch.
After several moments, the taillights are swallowed by the
night.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - NIGHT
A Panzer emerges from the treeline well beyond the wire of
the camp and just sits there growling like a beast. Suddenly
it fires a shell at nothing in particular, at the night - an
exhibition of random spite - then turns around and rolls back
into the forest.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - SAME TIME - NIGHT
From a watchtower, a couple of workers, having witnessed the
tank's display of impotent might, can make little sense of
it. Below, many of the workers mill around the yard, waiting
to be liberated. No one seems to know what else to do.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - DAY
Some Czech partisans emerge from the forest. They come down
the hill and casually approach the camp. Reaching the wire,
they're met by Pfefferberg and some other workers, rifles
slung over their shoulders. Through the fence -
158.
PARTISAN
It's all over.
PFEFFERBERG
We know.
PARTISAN
(pause)
So what are you doing? You're free
to go home.
PFEFFERBERG
When the Russians arrive. Until
then we're staying here.
The partisan shrugs, Suit yourself, and wanders back toward
the trees with his friends.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - NIGHT
Five headlights appear out of the night, five motorcycles
marked with the SS Death's-head insignia. They turn onto the
road leading to the camp gate and park, the riders shutting
off the engines.
SS NCO
Hello?
Shapes materialize out of the darkness within the camp.
Several armed and dangerous Jews.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - LATER - NIGHT
As the cyclists fill their tanks with gasoline borrowed from
the camp, the workers keep their rifles pointed at them. The
NCO in charge lines the gas cans neatly back up against the
wire.
NCO IN CHARGE
Thank you very much.
He climbs onto his motorcycle. The others climb onto theirs.
And drive away.
EXT. BRINNLITZ CAMP - DAWN
A lone Russian officer on horseback, tattered coat, rope for
reins, emerges from the forest. As he draws nearer, it
becomes apparent to the workers assembling on the camp yard,
that the horse is a mere pony, the Russian's feet in stirrups
nearly touching the ground beneath the animal's skinny
abdomen. 
159.
He reaches the camp, climbs easily down from the horse and,
in a loud voice, addresses the hundreds of workers standing
at the fence:
RUSSIAN
You have been liberated by the
Soviet Army.
This is it? This one man? The workers wait for him to say
more. He waits for them to move, to leave, to go home.
Finally -
RUSSIAN
What's wrong?
A few of the workers come out from behind the fence to talk
with him.
STERN
Have you been in Poland?
RUSSIAN
I just came from Poland.
STERN
Are there any Jews left?
The Russian has to think. Eventually he shrugs, 'no,' not
that he saw, and climbs back onto his pony to leave.
WORKER
Where should we go?
RUSSIAN
I don't know. Don't go east, that's
for sure, they hate you there.
(pause)
I wouldn't go west either if I were
you.
He shrugs and gives his little horse a kick in the ribs.
WORKER
We could use some food.
The Russian looks confused, glances off. The quiet hamlet of
Brinnlitz sits there against the mountains not half a mile
away.
RUSSIAN
Isn't that a town over there?
160.
Of course it is. But the idea that they could simply walk
over there is completely foreign to them. The Russian rides
away.
EXT. BRINNLITZ - DAY
All eleven hundred of them, a great moving crowd coming
forward, crosses the land laying between the camp, behind
them, and the town, in front of them.
Tight on the FACE of one of the MEN.
Tight on TYPEWRITER KEYS rapping his NAME.
Tight on A PEN scratching out the words, "METAL POLISHER" on
a form.
Tight on the KEYS typing, "TEACHER."
Tight on his FACE in the crowd.
Tight on the face of a woman in the moving crowd. The keys
typing her name. The pen scratching out "LATHE OPERATOR" The
keys typing "PHYSICIAN." Tight on her face.
Tight on a man's face. His name. Pen scratching out
"ELECTRICIAN." Keys typing "MUSICIAN." His face.
A woman's face. Name. Pen scratching out "MACHINIST." Keys
typing "MERCHANT." Face.
"CARPENTER." Face. "SECRETARY." Face. "DRAFTSMAN." Face.
"PAINTER." Face. "JOURNALIST." Face. "NURSE." Face. "JUDGE."
Face. Face. Face. Face.
HARD CUT TO:
EXT. FRANKFURT - DUSK (1955)
A street of apartment buildings in a working class
neighborhood of the city.
From somewhere, like a memory, echo the distant, plaintive
strains of "Gloomy Sunday."
INT. APARTMENT - DUSK
A 78 of the melancholy Hungarian love song turns beneath the
needle of a cheap hi-fi.
The door to the modest apartment opens and Oskar Schindler is
revealed inside. The elegant clothes are gone but the
familiar smile remains.
161.
SCHINDLER
Hey, how're you doing?
It's Poldek Pfefferberg out in the hall.
PFEFFERBERG
Good. How's it going?
SCHINDLER
Things are great, things are great.
Things don't look so great. Schindler isn't penniless, but
he's not far from it, living alone in the one room behind
him.
PFEFFERBERG
What are you doing?
SCHINDLER
I'm having a drink, come on in,
we'll have a drink.
PFEFFERBERG
I mean where have you been?
Nobody's seen you around for a
couple of weeks.
SCHINDLER
(puzzled)
I've been here. I guess I haven't
been out.
PFEFFERBERG
I thought maybe you'd like to come
over, have some dinner, some of the
people are coming over.
SCHINDLER
Yeah? Yeah, that'd be nice, let me
get my coat.
Pfefferberg waits out in the hall as Schindler disappears
inside for a minute. The legend below appears:
AMON GOETH WAS ARRESTED AGAIN,
WHILE A PATIENT IN A SANITARIUM AT
BAD TOLZ.
GIVING THE NATIONAL SOCIALIST SALUTE,
HE WAS HANGED IN CRACOW FOR CRIMES
AGAINST HUMANITY.
Schindler reappears wearing a coat, steps out into the hall,
forgets something, turns around and goes back in.
162.
OSKAR SCHINDLER FAILED AT
SEVERAL BUSINESSES, AND MARRIAGE,
AFTER THE WAR.
IN 1958, HE WAS DECLARED A RIGHTEOUS
PERSON BY THE COUNCIL OF THE YAD VASHEM
IN JERUSALEM, AND INVITED TO PLANT
A TREE IN THE AVENUE OF THE RIGHTEOUS.
IT GROWS THERE STILL.
He comes back out with a nice bottle of wine in his hand. He
remembered that but forgot to turn the hi-fi off and "Gloomy
Sunday" keeps playing as he and Pfefferberg disappear down
the stairs together -
SCHINDLER'S VOICE
Mila's good?
PFEFFERBERG'S VOICE
She's good.
SCHINDLER'S VOICE
Kids are good? Let's stop at a
store on the way so I can buy them
something.
PFEFFERBERGIS VOICE
They don't need anything. They just
want to see you.
SCHINDLER'S VOICE
Yeah, I know. I'd like to pick up
something for them. It'll only take
a minute.
Their voices fade. Against the empty hallway appears a faint
trace of the image of the factory workers, through the wire,
walking away from the Brinnlitz camp. And the legends:
THERE ARE FEWER THAN FIVE
THOUSAND JEWS LEFT ALIVE IN POLAND
TODAY.
THERE ARE MORE THAN SIX THOUSAND DESCENDANTS
OF THE SCHINDLER
JEWS.
FADE TO BLACK.
UNDER END CREDITS:
Moving slowly over the road of fractured gravestones winding
through Plaszow. Tuffs of grass and weeds between the spaces.
163.
A pick pries at one of the stones, and - Thousands of
mismatched fragments of unearthed stones on the ground like
pieces of a jigsaw puzzle.
A workman's hands place two together that fit, and - A wall
under construction, a memorial made entirely of the recovered
gravestones. Moving across them, two letters of a name are
all that remain of one, four letters of another, then a full
name, then half a name, three letters of another, two, and
finally, only a Jewish star.